Cervical nerve compression and impingement are not necessarily the same thing so that's what this
video is all about. What you want to make sure you understand is you can have radiation or pain
going down your arm which can be multiple structures that are being irritated or impinged.
Not every impingement is actually a nerve impingement which people generally think about.
You can have soft tissue other than nerve which is also soft tissue that is being impinged upon
and it will have radiation down the arm. You can have irritation of a nerve coming from the neck
and it's just out of nowhere as people call it but it's really not out of nowhere. What it actually
is is those subtle signs and symptoms had shown up previously. You just did not make note of it
and now the loudness of the pain and discomfort has been increased. So every time you have pain
down your arm or any portion of your arm that does not mean it's a nerve. It does not necessarily
mean that you're pinching anything because you can also have trigger points in the muscles of your
neck and shoulder blade and the shoulder joint that can shoot pain down the arm any portion of
the arm or even to your chest and your neck. Just wanted to bring this up to your attention
because a lot of times people automatically randomly look for or come up with a diagnosis
that is actually not accurate. So you got to pay attention to the detail
and if you're searching things you want to make sure that you search for the right things.
Of course there's no replacement for an actual specialist or someone who a clinician who is
familiar with these. If you're not following us on social media make sure you check the
description box. I'm Dr. Shaquille and I look forward to interacting with you more.
The spinal decompression make your back worse and increase your disc herniation or satica
pain.
You are not alone.
Although decompression can feel good for some, it can cause flare ups and worse pain
for others.
Now why is this?
Some disc herniations can tolerate traction and negative pressure, but if there is instability
in the surrounding area, this can create pain and spasms around the disc.
For these individuals, we should start with the combination of core and spine stability.
A favorite of mine is the bear position.
On all fours, hands under the shoulders, knees under the hips, pick the knees up just a couple
inches.
Now hold this position for time as you feel it really targets the core and we can easily
progress by kicking one leg out at a time.
Then we begin disc loading exercises which can range from extension, flexion, and even
lateral glide based exercises that do not create this negative pressure on the disc.
Once you combine the right spine and disc movements, you will see fast pain relief.
So if you would like to learn what the best low back plan is for you, visit the link in
bio to fix your back with me.
Cervical nerve compression and impingement are not necessarily the same thing so that's what this
video is all about. What you want to make sure you understand is you can have radiation or pain
going down your arm which can be multiple structures that are being irritated or impinged.
Not every impingement is actually a nerve impingement which people generally think about.
You can have soft tissue other than nerve which is also soft tissue that is being impinged upon
and it will have radiation down the arm. You can have irritation of a nerve coming from the neck
and it's just out of nowhere as people call it but it's really not out of nowhere. What it actually
is is those subtle signs and symptoms had shown up previously. You just did not make note of it
and now the loudness of the pain and discomfort has been increased. So every time you have pain
down your arm or any portion of your arm that does not mean it's a nerve. It does not necessarily
mean that you're pinching anything because you can also have trigger points in the muscles of your
neck and shoulder blade and the shoulder joint that can shoot pain down the arm any portion of
the arm or even to your chest and your neck. Just wanted to bring this up to your attention
because a lot of times people automatically randomly look for or come up with a diagnosis
that is actually not accurate. So you got to pay attention to the detail
and if you're searching things you want to make sure that you search for the right things.
Of course there's no replacement for an actual specialist or someone who a clinician who is
familiar with these. If you're not following us on social media make sure you check the
description box. I'm Dr. Shaquille and I look forward to interacting with you more.
The spinal decompression make your back worse and increase your disc herniation or satica
pain.
You are not alone.
Although decompression can feel good for some, it can cause flare ups and worse pain
for others.
Now why is this?
Some disc herniations can tolerate traction and negative pressure, but if there is instability
in the surrounding area, this can create pain and spasms around the disc.
For these individuals, we should start with the combination of core and spine stability.
A favorite of mine is the bear position.
On all fours, hands under the shoulders, knees under the hips, pick the knees up just a couple
inches.
Now hold this position for time as you feel it really targets the core and we can easily
progress by kicking one leg out at a time.
Then we begin disc loading exercises which can range from extension, flexion, and even
lateral glide based exercises that do not create this negative pressure on the disc.
Once you combine the right spine and disc movements, you will see fast pain relief.
So if you would like to learn what the best low back plan is for you, visit the link in
bio to fix your back with me.
Cervical nerve compression and impingement are not necessarily the same thing so that's what this
video is all about. What you want to make sure you understand is you can have radiation or pain
going down your arm which can be multiple structures that are being irritated or impinged.
Not every impingement is actually a nerve impingement which people generally think about.
You can have soft tissue other than nerve which is also soft tissue that is being impinged upon
and it will have radiation down the arm. You can have irritation of a nerve coming from the neck
and it's just out of nowhere as people call it but it's really not out of nowhere. What it actually
is is those subtle signs and symptoms had shown up previously. You just did not make note of it
and now the loudness of the pain and discomfort has been increased. So every time you have pain
down your arm or any portion of your arm that does not mean it's a nerve. It does not necessarily
mean that you're pinching anything because you can also have trigger points in the muscles of your
neck and shoulder blade and the shoulder joint that can shoot pain down the arm any portion of
the arm or even to your chest and your neck. Just wanted to bring this up to your attention
because a lot of times people automatically randomly look for or come up with a diagnosis
that is actually not accurate. So you got to pay attention to the detail
and if you're searching things you want to make sure that you search for the right things.
Of course there's no replacement for an actual specialist or someone who a clinician who is
familiar with these. If you're not following us on social media make sure you check the
description box. I'm Dr. Shaquille and I look forward to interacting with you more.
The spinal decompression make your back worse and increase your disc herniation or satica
pain.
You are not alone.
Although decompression can feel good for some, it can cause flare ups and worse pain
for others.
Now why is this?
Some disc herniations can tolerate traction and negative pressure, but if there is instability
in the surrounding area, this can create pain and spasms around the disc.
For these individuals, we should start with the combination of core and spine stability.
A favorite of mine is the bear position.
On all fours, hands under the shoulders, knees under the hips, pick the knees up just a couple
of inches.
Now hold this position for time as you feel it really targets the core and we can easily
progress by kicking one leg out at a time.
Then we begin disc loading exercises which can range from extension, flexion, and even
lateral glide based exercises that do not create this negative pressure on the disc.
Once you combine the right spine and disc movements, you will see fast pain relief.
So if you would like to learn what the best low back plan is for you, visit the link in
bio to fix your back with me.
Welcome everybody again to another episode of the IDMB show that showed the profiles,
the humans behind the really big ideas that are shaping our world, inspiring future creators,
and for all those like really great stories, I'm Ira Pastor, your Exponential Health Ambassador
along for this journey today. Today we are going to move into the topic of spinal cord injury.
And the spinal cord injury is sort of broadly defined as any damage to the spinal cord that
causes either temporary or permanent changes to its function.
Symptoms of spinal cord injury may include loss of muscle functions, sensation, autonomic function,
parts of the body that are below the level of the injury. Injury can occur at any level of the
spinal cord and be either complete, which is defined as a total loss of sensation or function,
or incomplete, meaning that some nervous signals are still able to travel past the injured area.
Depending on the location and the severity of the damage, symptoms can vary from numbness to
paralysis to incontinence. Long-term outcomes vary widely from ultimately full recovery to
permanent quadriplegia, paraplegia, and complications can include muscle atrophy, pressure
sores, infections, breathing problems, a wide range of conditions. And currently it's estimated that
direct medical expenses for spinal cord injury in the United States can run into the millions of
dollars, not including lost wages and earning potential, and include spinal surgeries, trauma
care, rehabilitation, long-term care, medical equipment, and so forth. A recent estimate in
the United States has about 18,000 new spinal cord injury cases every year, and the total
number of patients living with spinal cord injury in the U.S. about 290,000. So today's
guest who's going to take us further into this theme, as well as to some of the most exciting
work going on in the development of innovative therapeutic interventions for spinal cord injury,
is Dr. Wise Young. Dr. Young is both an MD and a Ph.D. He is Distinguished Professor of Cell
Biology and Neuroscience, the founding director of the W.M. Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience,
and the Richard H. Schindel Chair of Neuroscience at Rutgers University. Dr. Young achieved his
doctorate in physiology and biophysics from the University of Iowa. He got a medical degree
from Stanford, and for the last few decades has committed himself heavily to bringing innovative
treatments to people's spinal cord injuries. He built and trained a 25-center clinical trial
network in China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, where phase 2 human clinical trials are going on right
now, and on the biblical cord blood mononuclear cell and lithium therapy. And he's also established
in clinical trial networks in the U.S., Norway, and India. Dr. Young led the team that ultimately
discovered and established high-dose methylprednisolone therapy as one of the first effective
therapies for spinal cord injury. This 1990 work really upended many concepts that spinal
cord injuries were permanent and really allowed research to refocus and open entire new directions
of investigation and hope. Dr. Young also developed the first standardized RAT spinal
cord injury model, used worldwide nowadays for testing therapies, formed the first consortium
funded by the National Institute of Health to Test Promising Therapies, and helped establish
several widely accepted clinical outcome measures of spinal cord injury research. Dr.
Young also founded and serves editor-in-chief of the journal Neurotrauma. He organized the
International and National Neurotrauma Society's forums for scientists to collaborate on spinal
cord injury and brain research, and he served on advisory committees for the NIH, the National
Academy of Sciences, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and many other
spinal cord injury advisory boards. His work has been featured broadly across numerous national,
international news sources and print publications. He's appeared on 2020 with Barbara Walters and
Christopher Reeve on the Today Show with Katie Couric, 48 Hours, Fox News, CNN, USA Today,
and in Time Magazine named him as America's best spinal cord injury researcher. Some of his many
honors include being the first researcher elected to the spinal cord injury hall of fame,
the NIH, Jacob Javits Newer Science Award, the Cure Award, the list I can read for the next
half hour. All this being said, Dr. Young, thank you really for taking the time to come on the
show today and share your knowledge with us. Thank you, Ira. Much appreciated. So typically,
we'd start off this show by giving our guests the floor for a little bit just to talk about
themselves. Obviously, in this area, there's not too many people that don't know about you,
but for those that are new to the field and learning about it, just go a little bit into
your background, where you grew up, how you got interested in science and physiology and medicine,
and ultimately how you found a home at this epicenter of neuroscience and trauma care.
I think you already covered most of my education. In 1977, I was an intern at Bellevue Hospital
when I took care of my first spinal cord injury patient. It was very emotional for me because
I think one of the things that all doctors hate is to feel helpless, to feel as if there's nothing
you can do. And I had a 17-year-old wrestler, and I used to be a wrestler in high school,
who broke his neck in a wrestling match, and I had to tell the parents that there was nothing we
could do. Shortly after that, I had the opportunity to write several grants to NIH and to my surprise,
I got them grants. I think by the time I was 29 years old and I was just into my neurosurgery
residency at that time, I had received over a million dollar grant from NIH to set up a group
to study spinal cord injury and several grants to look at different areas of spinal cord injury,
particularly in acute spinal cord injury. So I spent 20 years doing that, developing a therapy
that we could use for acute spinal cord injury. In 1997, I moved to Rutgers University, where I
devoted myself to chronic spinal cord injury because there was nobody really addressing that issue of
people who are already spinal injured. And this is the, I would say, I think honestly say that
it's maybe one of the most hopeless groups of patients known. I mean, doctors would go into their
hospital rooms on the day of injury and tell them they'll never walk again,
even before they examine the patient. So it was really a, it's a field where I,
you wouldn't even do that if somebody had cancer. They have no hope. This is really one of the most
hopeless conditions in human history that people have said that you will never walk again to
many, many patients. And so I decided to take on a subject that I think most of my colleagues
believed would be a waste of time. Even I think my mentor, my PhD mentor, thought that I should
go do something else more useful. So as it turns out, a lot of dogmas were, I think, broken in the
last 10 years, not by me necessarily, but by more than a hundred laboratories have now shown that
animals can regenerate their spinal cord. And there's a lot of spontaneous regeneration going
on in the spinal cord. And we don't pay attention to it in part because a lot of this regeneration
does not result in function. And it's very difficult to see nerve fibers, which are called
axons to connecting. And we, two years ago, three years ago in 2016, we published the first
clinical trial showing that transplantation of the cells called umbilical cord blood mononuclear
cells into the spinal cord of people with chronic complete spinal cord injury, which you just defined.
People with no motor or sensory function below the injury site. These patients are chronic. They
are, our definition of chronic is you must be more than one year after injury and you must have
no neurological change over a six month period. So that's a reasonable definition
that you're complete. These are the patients who are told by all the doctors you'll never recover.
And so we took these patients, we transplanted them with umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells,
which have been matched for their for them. There are many umbilical cord blood banks all over
the world. And we we use something called human leukocyte antigen HLA matching to make sure that
the cells would not be rejected. And we transplanted this into the patients we did. We published a
study 27 patients in 2016. We did this is what is called an escalating dosing trial. We started out
with a low dose. We gave double that dose and then double that dose to the patients.
And we did a phase one phase two trial. The first phase is to show safety. We found that it was
quite safe to transplant these cells. No patient loss in the function. There was no deaths, no
severe adverse events associated transplants. Then we and this was done in Hong Kong at the two
flagship hospitals in Hong Kong. This is the Hong Kong University and the Chinese University of
Hong Kong. Really two of the best hospitals in the world. And we found that it was safe. We did a
test that's called diffusion tensor imaging, which shows fibers in this spinal cord. We
saw fibers grow across the injury side and we were really quite excited, but none of the patients
recovered any function. We were very disappointing. But then we went to the phase two trial, which was
in Kunming. Kunming is the capital of Yunnan province, which is the southernmost province of
China. There was an army hospital there that really did something very unusual. They're taking
patients after spinal cord injury and walking them six hours a day, six days a week for six months.
Called us the 666 program. And when they do this after injury, many of the patients recover
function. I mean, as many as half of the patients recover walking. And that's of course because
many patients are incomplete. And and when you exercise them, they do walk. And we found that
some patients with complete spinal cord injuries also recovered. But nobody had ever tried
walking patients that were chronic completely. So in the trial that we carried out in Kunming,
we did 20 patients. We randomized them to five treatment groups. The first three treatments
were low dose, high, medium dose, high dose, and then high dose plus a steroid drug called
methyl penicillin, which we found really makes the cell survive better. And the
is the high dose of mononuclear cells plus methyl penicillin plus a six week course of
lithium, which we showed in animals, improve the effects of these cell transplants. And the results
are actually quite surprising. Well, first of all, without even looking at the different therapies,
just overall, at the end of one year, we found that 75% of the patients are walking. 40% of the
patients walked with what we call minimal assistance. The steps are weak. So so they're
their knees would buckle. So we had people walking behind them with ropes tied around the knees to
sort of lock the knees as they are standing so their knees won't buckle and they wouldn't fall.
They're standing in a rolling walker in which they're pushing the walker or somebody's pulling
the walker and they're taking steps. They are walking like this six hours a day. And many of them
actually amazingly, you know, they look like in really good shape. I mean, if you walk six hours a
day, you'd be really in good shape, right? Actually, we wanted to add an extra six to the 666,
because many of these patients got six packs on their bellies, because their core muscles actually
improve a lot when you walk for six months. And you can see the muscles up here. But anyway, 75%
15 out of the 20 patients we treated actually recovered walking. 35% of which actually walked
without any assistance. And many of them stopped using their wheelchairs. And even more surprising
was the fact that 65% of the patients no longer needed to catheterize themselves when they
urinated. This was a bit of a shock to us because we didn't realize this. In fact, we didn't expect
this to happen. So we didn't find out until we unblinded the study that this actually was happening.
And what these patients found was that if they use two fingers, they kept themselves in the
super pubic region where the bladder is, and the bladder is full, they'll start peeing. And
once the peeing starts, it just completes itself when they catheterize themselves. Again,
there's no more urine in there for them. And so 65% of our patients no longer use catheters
to the bathroom. The other thing that's very impressive was that many patients with chronic
complete spinal cord injury, they have severe constipation. I mean, this is something that
happens. About 40, 50% of the patients actually can't go to the bathroom without digital manipulation
or putting suppositories in to stimulate the bowel movements. And so what happens is that
many patients are really disturbed by the fact that their loved ones have to do that to them and
have to help them do all these procedures. And I think many people would just tell me that this is
the worst thing in their lives, that they become dependent on somebody else having to
to do the bathroom functions for them. So now we found out that nearly 60% of the patients
have normal regular bowel movements, and they don't need somebody to do digital manipulation
or suppositories for them at all. And even more important, at this one month, at the one year
period when we examined them, they told us that they have not had an accident in three months.
In other words, they've become continent. Now both the bowel and bladder function actually appeared late.
We had the patients in a hospital for six months, and then we sent them home. And we didn't find out
about this until we did our one year follow up on the patients. So here it is, we have a therapy
that restores walking in about 75% of the patients by one year. 65% of the patients are
recovering bowel and bladder function. If you ask people with spinal cord injury, what do they want
most in their lives, they will tell you, we want to walk, we want to pee, we want to poop. And finally,
if they're young, they want sex. And a bunch of them told us that they're getting better
erections and better ejaculation. All the of life. Now this is obviously a small trial. And I have to
say, you know, we published this in 2016. And I think there has not, probably you haven't even heard
about the study. It was published in a relatively good journal, but we didn't go to the press,
we didn't hold press conferences. What we did was we applied to the FDA to do the trial in the US.
So they gave us permission last year to start the trial. And we're going to start the trial,
probably in the next month. The trial will involve hospitals in New York State, New Jersey,
and Pennsylvania. Now, we're going to be randomizing 27 patients, three treatment groups here in the
US. One of the treatment groups will be no treatment at all. One of the groups will receive
the cell transplants. One of the groups will receive cell transplants and lithium.
We're omitting the methyl prunisal. Because we found out that the methyl prunisal didn't seem to help.
We want to confirm that lithium is beneficial or not. So we have three treatment groups,
a control group with no treatment, a group with cell transplant and a group with cell transplant
and lithium. This is done at, you know, very good hospitals in the area, Mount Sinai in New York
City, Hackensack Medical Center in New Jersey, New Jersey Medical School, Kessler. And also we're
doing this in a rehab center called Good Shepherd in Pennsylvania, in Allentown. So anyway, these are
very, very good centers. And actually the hardest part about organizing this trial was
actually finding rehabilitation centers that are willing to walk our patients six hours a day,
six days, six months a day. People look at me and they say, are you crazy? I mean,
six, six, six. Can we do three, three, three? I said, what do you mean three, three, three? We'd
like to walk them three hours a day, three days, three months. And, you know, there's a very
interesting that it's the rehab people that's giving us the pushback. The surgeons say, oh, no
problem, we can transplant. It's a three hour skin to skin surgery. And the safety is very well
established. Very extensive animal studies that does not make tumors. By the way, umbilical
cord blood cells have now been used to treat 30 or 40,000 people for many conditions. And
it's never been shown to produce tumors. And these cells are essentially fetal cells. They're
newborn baby cells that produce a lot of growth factors. And what we found was that lithium
stimulates these cells to produce more growth factors. We transplant them into the spinal cord
around the injury site and find that they migrate into the injury site form a bridge.
Then when we give lithium or even without lithium, they're producing a lot of growth factors.
The nerve fibers follow them across the injury site and they grow all the way across.
And what we found was that if you don't exercise the patients and there were eight patients in
Hong Kong where we treated these patients, they get nothing back. They don't get no bladder function
back. They don't get walking back. Nothing. We just see fibers growing across the injury site.
But if we treat them and then we have them walk 666, they get motor function back and
bowel bladder back. So after that study was finished in 2016, we went on ahead and did
another trial that has not yet been published. And this trial was actually very surprising.
This has been full of surprises for me anyway. We did 30 patients. We randomized them to
surgery only with no cell transplants, just exposing the spinal cord. Then we had a group
of patients that got no surgery and we walked both groups 666. We were quite surprised to find that
one year, one out of four patients in both groups recovered walking. But not great walking. It's
worse than our treated patients. But to our surprise, patients in both groups recovered
bowel and bladder function. So it's like the bowel and bladder recovery occurs even if you
don't put cells into the patients. If you walk them six hours a day, six days a week or six months,
they actually will recover bowel and bladder function. And so what's going on here? Well,
first of all, I want to point out, even though the patients can walk long distances and many of
35% or no longer using the wheelchairs at all, these patients cannot move their legs voluntarily.
I'm down. They're prone. We say, move your legs. Move your legs. And they cannot move their legs.
Wiggle your toes. They can't move their toes. But once we put them on their feet,
their vestibular reflexes, their anti-gravity reflexes kick in and they're able to take steps.
Sure. And they can walk long distances and they don't need to use the wheelchairs anymore.
And even much better than that, none of the patients in our trial actually showed any
de-cubidide, which are pressure source or urinary tract infections, because I think
standing up six hours a day is very, very good for your bladder. I can imagine. So given this,
we applied to the US FDA to do this trial in the US because people would not accept just
a trial in China. So the US FDA gave us permission and we did extensive studies showing that it's
safe, et cetera. But what is most interesting was that the US FDA forced us to do a control group,
a no-treatment control group. So I argued with them. I said, look, you know, patients that don't
get surgery, they know they didn't get any surgery. So you can't blind that, right? And I said,
those patients who don't get surgery won't work as hard as those patients that receive surgery
because they believe that they receive the therapy. They know. I was also afraid that
none of the patients would want to be randomized to a third possibility of getting no therapy.
Just sure. We were quite surprised to find out when we talked to our spinal cord injury community
that they don't mind that. As one of them said to me, you know, here, you're coming to me and
you're saying, you're going to put some cells into my spinal cord. And then two weeks later,
I'm going to go stand six hours a day. Then I'm going to start walking. And I'm going to walk six
hours a day. Are you nuts? I mean, I haven't walked for, and by the way, our patients in the study
were from two to 20 years after spinal cord injury. These patients haven't walked in that long. They
said, I'm not going to walk in two weeks. Time to start to walk and do all these things. You're
crazy. In fact, they said, because we offered in all the control patients, if they don't receive
the controls at the end of one year, we'll give them the treatment. They said, wow, we would prefer
to be in that group. They said, we want to be pre-trained and then get the cells and get six
months of walking again. They'll say, they said to us, I'll bet you will walk better than those
other guys. So there's a certain amount of competition involved, but there's no difficulty,
no problems accepting being assigned to the control group, as long as they will receive
the therapy at one year. They think they'll do better. So this is the trial. We're going to do
that. We're going to start that probably in beginning of December. And it's already been
announced in the clinicaltrials.gov. And we've taken a lot of time. We didn't hold any news
conferences, but I've talked to thousands of people with spinal injury. So they understand
what this trial is about, why they're going to do it, why exercise is necessary, etc., etc. So
by the end of next year, we'll know whether we can replicate the China experience.
In the meantime, we're starting trials in India and Taiwan. And we're holding off on doing it in
Mainland China, because that's where we originally did the trial. But we wanted to make sure we
can do it in Taiwan. Taiwan, we're going to do a very special trial. We're going to go ahead
and do what is called a surgical control. We're just going to operate on the patients
without transplanting cells. Now, the reason why we did this other trial with 30 patients where
we operated and didn't put any cells into them was to see whether there's any benefit or harm
from doing that. And what we found was that amazingly, those patients that got surgery,
no cell transplants recovered by our own bladder function. So in Taiwan, the patients are very
happy to be randomized to this, and they'll get to treatment at the end of one year.
So we're going to do these three trials. The US one will probably start first in December,
in January, February, we'll start Taiwan, India. And then, depending on the results of these trials,
if we replicate our China experience, we will go ahead and do a phase three pivotal trial.
And I'm, of course, hoping that phase three will confirm the results of the phase two,
and that we will get worldwide regulatory approval. Absolutely. Right now, the whole field,
everybody in the field is so pessimistic, they aren't willing to believe anything.
You cannot convince them with a 20 patients trial or a 28 patient trial, which is what we had in
China, to see it on a multi-center trial involving hundreds of patients. And so that we're going to
give that to them. You know, to reverse human history, you have to do, you know, this is what,
I guess, just like the invasion of Kuwait or whatever, this is like overwhelming force.
You have to do that. Because once you open that door, what will happen is that many,
many other people will say, I can do that too. The Me Too syndrome in pharmacology is very,
very powerful. Everybody will want to do it. It must be extremely fulfilling for you to see
its scale up finally in this context. And yeah, I know, having come out of the
pharma industry for years that, you know, yeah, they fight against you all the time.
And then they say, oh, it was self-evident. Then you would succeed. But yeah, I mean,
it's truly amazing. I mean, just as I don't have a side note, the whole situation with the controls,
you know, with the surgery and some improvement in terms of the bowel function and the bladder
function. Are there any theories about why that is? All these three functions are mediated by
central pattern generators in the lumbosacral spinal cord. I mean, I don't know if you've
ever tried to stop midstream when you're peeing. It can't sneeze either.
But once that program starts, it's hard to stop. And it just finishes. I mean, it's
programmed into your spinal cord. Same thing with when you defecate, right? It's hard to
stop it. Same thing with walking. Walking actually is a program that is located in your l1 spinal
cord. By the way, that's one of the reasons why we limit the trial to C5 to T11. We don't want
people who have lumbosacral damage, which might damage the central pattern generators
part of the trial. Although we will do them in a separate trial later on,
at least at the present time, our current theory is that these centers are still intact,
that there are fibers that have grown. They're not specifically activating these centers in
order to get these functions. And they can do that after extensive intensive training. So that's
the theory. Very interesting. And we found that actually, even without transplanting cells,
60 to 80 percent of the patients are able to recover bowel and bladder function just from
666 walking six hours a day, six days a week for six months. Now, this requires a tremendous amount
of commitment from our patients. I mean, if you're walking six hours a day, six days a week,
you're not going to be working. You're just going to be devoting yourself to doing this.
Sure. So what do I see as the future? I see it as this being an absolutely necessary step for
recovery of function in a system that hasn't worked for years. You're going to take somebody
who will chronic spinal cord. I mean, if you've had a cast on your legs for, let's say, three months,
I guarantee you, you'll find that all your muscles have atrophy. Same thing happens to the spinal
cord. The spinal cord will undergo atrophy. To rebuild that, you really have to put in the
work and the time to retrain the whole system in order to work. So our spinal cord injury community
has accepted this, I think, very basic notion, but the doctors have not yet. There are three clinical
trials carried out in the last four years, which involve no exercise. They stopped the trials.
They shut down the therapy. I don't think it is because the cells don't necessarily work.
I think it's because they didn't exercise the patients. No, it's a fascinating finding. It
sounds kind of obvious just listening to you talk about it. You wonder why no one's picked that up,
but it says something about you and the way you think about this. Going to the cells themselves,
I mean, it seems that you're putting a lot of time into the neonatal blood monocular cells,
but when I look at your research, you've been very active with other types of stem cells as well,
neural stem cells, mesenchymal and so forth, and also you've done work in the area of these
different inhibition factors to prevent teratoma formation as far as the pluripotent
or the embryonic stuff's concerned. Are the monocular cord blood cells where you're primarily
focused now, or are you also still looking at various different types of stem cells?
We have to choose a cell that's practical, that's safe. So there are umbilical cord blood
has been now collected since 1989. There are about 100 some odd cord blood banks all around the world
that have collected umbilical cord blood. They're using this to treat cancer, bone problems,
and thalassemia, sickle cell anemia, et cetera, and it has a very, very strong safety record,
and now they're even using a treat, autism, and other things. But the cells are available,
that's number one, the cells are absolutely safe, and number three, it's affordable. It's not like,
you know, induced pluripotent stem cells, which may cost a ton of money because you have to make a
custom cell for you. All you have to do is the same thing with people do for umbilical cord
blood cell transplants. The expensive part of this is really not the cells. The most expensive part
is the walking training. But then what we're doing is we're trying to save a lot of money by
introducing non-medical people to do the walking. You don't need a physical therapist to walk the
patients you need, and we're using undergraduate students. I can tell you, um, athletes, you know,
we had a spinal cord injury at Rutgers, you know, several years ago, and oh my god, every athlete
wants to come and help. There's a group of people called kinesiologists, and they're,
they want to do this, and many of our science students, they want to walk the patients. It's
like the fulfillment of their science to see the results come out. And so we are actually
very excited that we can do this. You know, the veterans, the veterans come to me, they've said,
you know, can we come to New Jersey, get the cells, and then go back to our own VA to walk.
You know, there are like 57,000 vets with complete spinal cord injuries in the United States,
you know, being taken care of at the VA hospitals. So I said, sure, but you know,
we've got to get the walking program started in the VA. So I told them that I would.
So I went down to the Atlanta, the VA hospital in, in, I'm sorry, in Augusta, Georgia.
It's the largest active duty spinal cord injury center. I'm very committed to walking. And you
know what they said to me when I told them that in our trial, not a single patient got a urinary
tract infection or a decubitus, a pressure sore. Okay. They says, do you know 80% of our,
of our admissions for our spinal cord injury patient base is for these two conditions,
urinary tract infection or decubidine. They said, why are you talking about walking? You have a cure
and urinary tract infections. And they said each admission to us is over $200,000.
So, so they're saying, look, why don't you come and walk the patients walking program. So this
helps with the decubidine and the urinary tract infections. And this will pay for itself.
I said, wow, that's a great idea. So we're going to try to do that. And we're really hoping,
you know, they're one of the things that we know in the VA is that there's a very high
suicide rate amongst vets. Okay. And as it turns out, many of the suicides are occurring in people
with spinal cord injury, you know, and everybody, you know, they get their legs blown off or they
get something, they're fixed, they go back, people who have spinal cord injury, they can't get fixed.
And they don't go back to work. They don't go back to doing all the things that they can do.
And so a lot of people just can't get back to work when they have spinal cord injury.
If we have something that restores bowel and bladder and gets patients walking again,
suicide rate should go down. It was very interesting that Michael Jackson's family,
Jackson Family Foundation actually approached us to see if they could help do a VA system-wide
program for walking people with spinal cord injury and then doing this thing on a large scale.
So we're actually very, very excited about doing this in the US and then also doing this around
the world. We're hoping to establish a new model. It should not be all medical. I think the 666
walking program should be done in part by non-medical people. You need to be a physical
therapist in order to walk a patient. You need to have some muscles and determination, right?
And what is so interesting is that people with spinal cord injury, they understand this
innately that they have to exercise in order to walk. And they understand it better than we do.
So we're hoping to change the world with this. And we think that this is going to be true not
only of spinal cord injury, but also stroke, multiple sclerosis, peripheral nerve diseases.
All the neuro-disabilities will also require this kind of exercise. And we need to have a model
where it doesn't cost a million dollars to do this. And by the way, if we can argue with a VA
that this is worth a $200,000 admission to the VA for UTI, Neural Tract Infections, and
Cubotide, insurance companies will be very glad to cover this in program. And so we want to start
this not only in the United States, but in India, China, and Europe. And Norway in particular in
Europe has been very interested in this. They give creative, grave medical care. It's only
country in the whole world that basically said to me, wise, you come here, do the trial in Norway,
we'll do it for free. Hospitals will cover all the costs. And because they immediately understood
that if they can get the 4,560 patients in Norway walking again, peeing and pooping again on their
own, they will save a ton of money. I see that. So part of this is not only the science involved.
Sure. It's really the social structure involved to get these people out of their wheelchairs and
walking again to give them hope. Absolutely. So that's been my work for the last 10, 15 years.
It's been exciting. It's an exciting set of work. I mean, I've followed you for years now.
I'm a Rutgers graduate myself. And it's fascinating seeing, obviously, everything goes slower than
it should in this field, but you've definitely stayed with it. And it's amazing where we are
today in 2019. Moving a little back to you now, you mentioned early on, I usually ask the question
about influencers in your life. And you mentioned that along the way, there were some people that
said, why should you get out of this stuff now? It's not worth your time. Anyone of you specifically
want to give a shout out to in terms of people that convinced you to stay with it? If it wasn't
for them, you'd be doing cardiology or something totally different that you might want to mention
along the way. Chained with a scientist, his name is Rudolfo Linas. He was my PhD mentor. And
you know, I'm very proud of the fact that he actually along the way changed his mind about
things like plasticity and regeneration. I think the neuroscience field itself has come around to
the concept of regeneration. They have come around to the concept that things will grow,
things will change their connectivity so that they will restore function. I don't think the
resistance is coming from the scientists. Also, I'm very grateful to the neurosurgeons with whom I
worked for 20 years at NYU. There are too many to mention, but I can tell you one thing, neurosurgeons
they say, we can do this. It's only a three-hour procedure. We can open an exposed spinal cord,
we can inject the cells in. They're very excited about doing this. A lot of the pushback that we
have right now is from people who actually deal with the day-to-day lives of the people. And
for 30, 40 years, these people have been telling patients that they'll never walk again. And it's
very difficult to change their mindset. And by the way, I absolutely do not want to take
bypass these people. I think these people are absolutely critical that we need their buy-in
with this intensive exercise program. If they don't buy in, then rehabilitation itself is in
trouble. But rehabilitation really has to pay attention to the fact that you have to train
people to regain function. And it must find more efficient ways of doing that.
Technology will bring us a long ways. Because you can stimulate a muscle 10 times a second,
but you can only take one step every two seconds. So can you imagine the future? You'll be lying in
bed stimulating yourself. And you can do a lot of this stuff using technology, not just by walking
six hours a day, maybe while you're sleeping, exercise and reconnecting things. I mean, there's
a whole new world out there. And we need to actually start exploring this. And it's such a
common sense thing that at the beginning, if you've lost all your connectivity, and you're
getting new fibers getting in there, you've got to teach your brain what buttons to push.
If your brain doesn't know what buttons to push, you won't get any function. Actually,
sensory function is really important. You have to know what the incoming signals are.
Not going to be the same. So you have to learn new signals. It's like watching your baby walk.
It takes them six months or longer. So that's what we have to recreate in people who have not
been walking for 20 years or longer. So it's really an exciting time. And we need to bring
the rehabilitation doctors away from the negativity. Basically, the theory right now in
rehabilitation is to teach patients to learn to live with what they have, to learn to live with
disabilities. And so our goal is to teach them how to overcome their disabilities, how to regain
function. This is a brand new idea in this field. And I'm hoping that they will buy in,
and they're going to be the generation of rehabilitation doctors that will discover all
these new ways of restoring function that we always consider to be impossible.
And this is going to be true not only of spinal cord injury, but stroke, brain injury.
Can you imagine that 90,000 people in coma, they have the same problem as sometimes
spinal cord injury. They have parts of the brains that they haven't used. So anyway,
these things should be so obvious. It doesn't require a rocket scientist or somebody like me
to say this, but how come I don't know if you know the story that is really the saddest thing I think
in our, for humankind. When somebody has had a cardiac arrest or severe brain injury,
they go into a coma. They're now, maybe from pressure from the insurance companies and so on,
they're pushing to unplug them after four months, after four weeks. They've changed the term
persistent vegetative state to permanent vegetative state, so that you give reason to
unplug them, even though they might awake three months, six months a year later. That's because
of the cost. Also, it's because when they wake up, they are disabled. Of course, if you've been
comatose for six months, you're not going to be able to function very well with your brain.
And so this whole thing is going to extend because we need solutions for these problems.
By the way, these problems will bankrupt our medical care system. We need to solve them.
I think the answer is not going to be to kill them.
That's never the answer. I'm in complete agreement with you on all these topics.
And I think one of the things, also just having hung around the drug industry,
as long as they did, we've convinced everybody out there that the answers are just going to be
the little white pill that we get at the local pharmacy, and that's it. We don't have to put
any effort into it. And as you're showing, like any system, the spinal cord is its own
little ecosystem of things. It's biochemical. It's biophysical. It's biomechanics. And you can't
just think one little component of that system, a la systems biology, is going to be the single
magic bullet that they like to give you in the farm industry. And I think what you're doing is
extremely important in sort of getting that message out there that you want to walk again.
Yes, there's cells. There's some lithium. There's some other supportive compounds,
but you've got to get up and move and learn to walk again as well. So I think that's
extremely important. And just listening to your passion behind this, it's just very inspiring.
So let me just take another two minutes of your time.
Take as long as you want. It's fascinating. I'll tell you one other problem I've been
now working on for the last five years. As soon as we got the results of this trial,
I knew that everybody with spinal cord injury would want this therapy. And umbilical cord blood
cells, there are lots of umbilical cord blood banks. I think the total number of umbilical
cord blood units, each unit comes from one baby, is about 900,000 in the world. I estimate that
there are about three million people with chronic complete spinal cord injury. Okay. Or chronic
incomplete, even incomplete, but severe disability is due to spinal cord injury, about three million
people. That if let's say 10% of these people want this therapy every year, that's 300,000 people.
In three years, the total world supply of umbilical cord blood will be depleted.
It's like when there's nothing you can do, it's okay to sympathize and say, I'm sorry, you know,
there's no cells and there's no treatment. But when you do have a therapy that will restore
function or you better be able to deliver or people will get really, really upset. The other
thing that will happen is that when you put a squeeze on a resource, the prices go up.
Unaffordable. So it becomes a therapy only for the rich. So I'm now with a very good friend
who used to work at J&J. His name is Ken Jason. He and I have partnered up and we're
trying now to scale up the use of umbilical cord blood so that we can treat millions of people.
And wow, that's been an exciting effort. So for example, we currently only collect 5%
of all the cord blood in the world. 95% of the cord blood in the world is just thrown away.
One of the things is actually to collect a lot more cord blood. Sure. Number two is every unit
of cord blood contains 200 million mononuclear cells and we're using only 6.4 million to treat
one patient. So each unit can actually be used to treat 20 patients. Absolutely. So just those
two factors alone means that we can probably increase the number of cord blood cells available
for treatment for very little money. You know, you can do the math yourself. If we let's say
increase the collection rate to 20%, which is not that crazy. Finally, if we if we collect all the
cord blood and split it into aliquots so it can treat 20 patients, that alone will give you
millions of units to millions of doses that you can treat people with spinal cord injury.
Now, there have been all these reports, more than 100 papers now have come out showing that
umbilical cord blood cells are beneficial for stroke. It may be beneficial for macular degeneration
of the eyes and there's 200 million people around the world and it may be useful for treating patients
with renal disease like people who are on dialysis today. When you when you talk about these conditions,
hundreds of millions of people, you need that many cells to treat them. Currently no um no
stem cell source can treat millions. People are still thinking about treating 10 or 20,000.
They're still thinking about charging $300,000 for this therapy. So what we're now trying to do
is and I've set up a company to do this to provide a model where we can increase the
collection rate and we reduce the price by 100 fold to make it affordable and that's to be
affordable to the third world countries. And by the way, it makes sense because third world
countries have more babies than we do. India has 90,000 babies per day. It's not accord blood.
Yeah and so part of this is solving the problem not just from a medical standpoint,
we have to solve it from a social standpoint from a societal standpoint to make this an
affordable therapy so that the exercise plus the cells together maybe would cost, I don't know,
$10,000, $20,000. If you do that then it would benefit everybody in the world.
Anyway so so I've been working very hard on that part of it now you know besides the clinical
trials. That part I think is actually the most interesting and the most challenging. This is a
because there's there's technology involved. There's really a lot of you know economics involved
and just figuring out the solutions and getting the governments to and we have to have private
public partnerships and so on for just to get these things going. Sure and of course I'm not
going to be able to do all this. What is going to happen? I just I'm hoping to set things into place
and have students and other people take it and run with it to get the infrastructure
set up and then it has to be run by people, really smart people, to make it so that it would
benefit the maximum number of people. So this is what is really really exciting to me and I
you know we have a lot of very very excited Dr. Students here. I can imagine. I've got whole
bunches of students working in the lab not only that volunteering to walk the patients to to figure
out new ways of growing the cells, new ways of scaling the the system so that that we can get
you know right now it costs about $10,000 for one dose of the umbilical cord blood cells. I'd
like to get it down to a hundred. That would do that would change everything.
And so so you know these are the kinds of things that we're very excited about at Rutgers. We've
got a whole bunch of really really smart students who want to do non-profit medicine
and boy I it's a it's a really exciting time to be in in education. Absolutely absolutely I
can imagine and I'm just glad to see it happening at Rutgers and right right nearby.
You know Dr. Ogis it's uh it's been very inspiring and just hearing you you talk about
all this and you know once again your passion behind it um the fact you stayed with it which
is a rare thing nowadays in the in this space and I just really wishing you the best moving forward
and once again for everybody that's watching on the YouTube channel but also will be listening
on on the various radio networks we've been spending time with the amazing Dr. Wise Young
distinguished professor of cell biology and neuroscience founding director of the WM Keck
Center for Collaborative Neuroscience and the Richard Schindel Chair of Neuroscience
all at Rutgers University here on the uh in the northeast United States. Dr. Young really
thank you so much for everything you do thank you for the time that you put into this and really
as we say moving the the human story forward not just here in the U.S. but everywhere thank you
Our technology is based on taking a small tissue biopsy from the stomach of the patient
and separating the extracellular matrix and the cells from this tissue.
While the extracellular matrix, the biomaterial, is processed into a personalized hydrogel,
the cell sarip program to become embryonic stem cell-like cells, and then when we put
the cells inside the hydrogel, we can mimic the embryonic development of the spinal cord
and develop 3D neuronal networks with the motor neurons.
The process of what we do is we take from the patient itself the omentum, which is a
fatty tissue from the abdomen.
We can separate the cells and the extracellular matrix.
The cells are reprogrammed to become iPSCs, stem cells, while the extracellular matrix
is processed to become a hydrogel.
Then we can mix between the two to create, to generate the implants.
We differentiate them into spinal cord, motor neuron implants, and then we can implant that
into injured spinal cord into the patient.
We hope that the integration process of the cells of the implant will create functional
connections with motor neurons or sensory neurons in the spinal cord and will improve
functional recovery of the patient.
So based on this technology, we recently formed a company, Matrisoft, and in the future we
are going to transplant human tissue implants in paralyzed patients, helping them to walk
again.
Please welcome to the stage Commander J.P. Kretien.
Welcome back.
It is my pleasure to introduce Dr. David Borden.
Dave is a principal investigator in our BG Plus program.
BG is for bridging the gap and the gap is a serious injury to the spinal cord that completely
disrupts the flow of neural information.
So people with this injury have no sensory or motor function below the injury.
Anyone can sustain a serious spinal cord injury but it is more prevalent in military and
veteran populations and as you can imagine it is devastating and profoundly life altering.
Dave and his team are working on a revolutionary solution to this problem.
So please join me in welcoming Dave Borden.
Alright thank you J.P. for that introduction and really it is truly a pleasure to be here
to describe to you what we are doing to help our wounded warriors.
We are building something called the intelligent spine interface and that is to bridge the
gap and spinal cord injury.
I am going to start with a video that gives a good introduction to this project and the
team that we put together to solve this problem.
The brain is a computer that runs the body.
The spinal cord is the main electrical cable that connects that brain, that computer to
the rest of the body.
Similarly it carries electrical signals from the different parts of the body back to the
brain to interpret.
We are going to treat a patient who had a spinal cord injury.
The signals that are generated from the brain that we typically send to the muscles in the
legs and the arms are not able to get through the area of injury.
So that function is completely lost in a patient with paraplegia or quadriplegia for example.
The intelligent spine interface or ISI is the fusion between neurotechnology and spinal
cord neuroscience.
This is a spinal cord machine interface that we are developing to allow us to help patients
with spinal cord injury.
The hope is that it enables them to walk and to use different body functions again.
In the spinal cord that is injured there is a break in the spinal cord.
We are attempting to bridge the gap of injury.
How this intelligent spine interface works is to be sensing the signals that are coming
up say from your toe up to the electrode array that is sitting below the injury.
To take those signals out of the body that is going to a computer where it is being
interpreted, outputs of that get sent back into the spinal cord to the other electrode
array and those signals then propagate up to the person's brain.
What we are going to do in this current study is run machine learning methodologies to interpret
how these signals relate to important activities of daily living for each participant.
It is a much more computational understanding of the brain.
What is really going on with those neural networks is going to create a better understanding
of what it is that we are dealing with other than this is injured tissue.
Our team consists of engineers, neuroscientists, neurosurgeons, rehabilitation specialists
and physical therapists, machine learning specialists in computer vision space.
We work with Carney Institute at Brown University.
The School of Engineering at Brown University includes corporate partners, Intel Corporation,
Microleads Medical and Modular Bionics.
This project was originally supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
or DARPA.
As well as the Veterans Administration.
The hope is that this will translate into a widespread clinical tool that clinicians
can give to patients.
We have the facilities, we have the depth of science, we have the world's experts here
and we are very excited that this project has the potential to take our research to
the next level.
Alright, so how is spinal cord injury treated today?
Well it's done through decompression, mechanical solutions that put rod and screws into your
spine to stabilize it physically and to allow for a pressure to be relieved.
That's all we can do today.
There is some research going on about motor reactivation by activating circuits below
the lesion site.
But what I'm talking about today is really a jump in what we can accomplish which is
bridging the gap.
This is an electrical interface, a functional interface between above the lesion and below
the lesion to send signals back and forth through machine learning interpretations.
So what do we need to do to do this?
Well we have to develop a high density interface to the spinal cord that can both listen and
write into the spinal cord itself.
We have to develop neuromodulation tools that are good for sensory replacement as well
as motor activation.
And we make sure this system is bi-directional, meaning we're recording signals, being able
to put them into some other external box, or maybe one day an implanted box that is
a computational module, able to interpret and then put command signals back out again.
That's our challenge.
Again, as mentioned in the video, it's an enormous team of industry partners, academic
institutions, clinicians, and really a wonderful group of people.
So I'm going to jump right into what we're looking at with our first participant we've
done in this study.
So on the left you see that the participant had a complete spinal cord injury.
This is from a very severe boating accident where their spine was severed completely in
half.
What our system does, or looks like, is here on the right side of the page, which is an
electrode array placed above the lesion site and an electrode array placed below the lesion
site, bridging that gap.
You see it here implanted in this participant.
So I want to jump right into what were the things we could do with this type of implant
and using this technology, since it's a demo session.
Not advancing.
There we go.
So the first video I'm going to show you is a person who has spinal cord injuries, same
person we just saw.
And we are now stimulating their spinal cord above their lesion site.
This person, again, because they have a complete injury, cannot feel anything below their waist
and cannot see what's going on there.
They're blindfolded to this.
And she is reporting with her left and right hand which leg is being moved and what the
angle of that knee joint is.
Notice she's doing this with both of the legs, so both hands at the same time.
We are providing that stimulation in real time.
There was no training involved in this by the participant.
They're immediately able to interpret that signal.
Well, in this case, it doesn't feel like their knee.
It feels like a replacement of stimulation.
So they're mapping that internally in their brain.
But still, they're immediately able to use that signal functionally, which is pretty
wonderful.
So when we decided, we would give the participant control of the stimulation itself.
You might think, as an engineer, we go through and we try to probe this huge parameter space
of stimulation on this pulse width or that frequency or this amplitude.
It takes us a long time to actually find the optimal parameters in that space.
If we give these controls to a participant, they can find that optimal parameter within
10 seconds, 20 seconds.
That's hugely important when we think about there are machine learning models behind all
this mapping the stimulation to actual output, whether that's a perception or a leg movement.
Those models are static today.
We want those to learn over time.
How are we going to train those models?
We need input from the participant to give the context of what is good and what is bad.
So we've been exploring that in this study, and we think that's going to be a huge help
as we move forward in this program.
Now what's also most important to think about is what is the participant's perspective of
using this new technology?
So I'll go through a series of videos here with the time remaining to talk about some
of those.
So here she is describing control of her stimulation on her own.
What's the DJ experiment?
That was really cool.
I liked that because I could really tell what was, I could kind of figure out what you guys
are stimulating and how you were stimulating it, and I could manipulate them to do what
I wanted them to do.
So that was fun being in control of it and seeing how the stimulation worked.
So do you think being in control of something like an array for daily life and kind of figuring
out what you're doing, kind of programming for today, you're going to feel this if I do
that, would that be something helpful?
I definitely think so, especially if I get really good at them and get my legs to move
in a certain way.
Because I know I could get my hip to jump versus my toe to move, but if you could get
them to move in a helpful way, even just standing up for a second, I don't know, that
would be really helpful.
So the next video I'm going to show is about her interpretation of how she could use this
sensation control in her daily lives.
Do you feel that those notes of sensation, would those be helpful for you in your daily
life?
I think once we were doing the things with the ankles and knees just now, where I could
tell whether it was flexed up or pointed down, which side it was, I think that could be really
helpful.
Obviously it didn't feel like my feet were moving, I just felt the feedback, but the
more I felt it, the better I could tell.
I know that's a pointed left footer, I know that's a flexed right foot.
I'm going to skip that video because of time.
I want to give you a perspective about their motivation after the study, and what the study
meant to this participant, I think it's a really important part of this work.
Here I'll play that video again, if it goes, there we go.
I'm not applying to grad school at Brown, so I didn't come join you guys.
I don't know, I feel like everything we did here was super cool, I don't know, I feel
like I want to come back and do this stuff.
So not only are we building new technologies to advance how we can communicate with the
spinal cord, these tools are built in a way that are motivating to participants and eventual
patients who have these implanted in them.
I do want to show a final slide here of sort of a big picture, which I think not showing
up right now, there it goes, great.
So a big picture of what we're doing here, this is our system again, building a bi-directional
system into the nervous system.
We are doing that through a leap in our technology space, so we built an electrode arrays interface
with the spinal cord that I can show you here, this is the state of the art today, which
is a 32 channel system from Boston Scientific, it has four big pigtails coming out the back
of it.
Our new HD64 system has an ASIC built onto it, which is a multiplexer allowing us to
connect to right now 64 channels, but that system will scale to many more numbers and
only has two wires coming out of it, or two cables.
That's really important as we try to build towards the next generation interfaces to
the nervous system.
And with that, I think I'll thank my entire team for all this work, and I'll end there.
So thank you very much for listening.
This section of the video will help you understand the nature of spinal cord injury, its causes,
effects, and classifications the medical care team may use in reference to your loved one.
Spinal cord injury occurs when there is any damage to the spinal cord which blocks communication
between the brain and the body. After a spinal cord injury, a person's sensory, motor, and
reflex messages are affected and may not be able to get past the damage in the spinal cord.
Sensory messages involve feelings of hot, cold, touch, pain, pressure, and body position.
Motor messages tell the muscles in your arms, hands, fingers, legs, toes, chest, and other parts
of your body how and when to move. Reflex messages are involuntary, protecting your body by an
instinctive reaction. Also, since messages between the bowel and bladder and the brain
may no longer travel up and down the spinal cord, these functions may undergo dramatic changes.
Acquired spinal cord injuries can occur from either trauma or medical diseases that affect
the spinal cord. In trauma there may be collapse of the bony vertebrae around the canal that holds
the spinal cord and the soft spinal cord then can be torn or punctured or bleed and that leads to
relative levels of disconnection within the cord. The cord may be completely cut,
it may be partially injured. The amount of injury can be mild, moderate, or very severe and complete.
Acquired non-traumatic causes of spinal cord injury run a gamut of potential diseases. These might
include cancer or a tumor that presses on the spinal cord from outside the cord. It may be
related to tumors that grow within the spinal cord and expand outwardly. It may be due to bleeding
into the spinal cord and lack of blood flow into the spinal cord or a misconnection between the
arteries and the veins that sometimes you're born with. There also are diseases like multiple sclerosis
that can affect the spinal cord or viral illnesses that can lead to inflammation in the spinal cord.
You may hear the terms complete or incomplete used to describe the injury. A complete injury means
that there is no function or sensation below the level of the injury. An incomplete injury means
there is some function remaining below the primary level of the injury. A person with an
incomplete injury may be able to move one limb more than another or may be able to feel sensation
in parts of the body that he or she can't move. Advances in trauma care and medical technology
mean that incomplete injuries continue to become more common than complete injuries.
The most common causes of spinal cord injury are from some type of trauma or disease.
Most traumatic spinal cord injuries are caused by motor vehicle accidents, falls often among the
elderly or from construction related accidents, and violence including gunshot wounds and stabbings
account for a number of spinal cord injuries. Sports and athletic activities, especially
football, gymnastics, and diving into shallow water account for more than 15 percent of spinal
cord trauma. Diseases such as cancer, arthritis, osteoporosis, and inflammation of the spinal cord
are also common causes of spinal cord injury and these are classified as non-traumatic.
More than half of the people affected by spinal cord injury in the United States are male.
The majority of people who sustain a spinal cord injury are young adults between the ages of 16 and
30 due in part to riskier behaviors. The effects of spinal cord injury vary depending upon the
patient's level of injury. In general though, they affect a person physically and emotionally.
We'll discuss in more detail the various levels of injury in chapter 5. Next, we want to introduce
some terms you may hear during the trauma care stay. The first term is paralysis or loss of motion.
Paralysis is a partial or complete loss of function, especially when involving the motion
or sensation in a part of the body. Keep in mind that some people with spinal cord injury
do see varying amounts of return and function as time progresses. Paraplegia does not affect the
arms but typically affects the trunk and both legs. This is usually a result of injuries in the
thoracic and lumbar levels. This type of paralysis can affect all or part of the trunk, legs,
and pelvic organs depending on the specific level of injury.
Tetraplegia, also called quadriplegia, refers to paralysis from approximately the neck down.
Tetraplegia results from injury to the spinal cord in the neck and is associated with total
or partial loss of functions in both arms and legs. This type of paralysis means arms,
trunk, legs, and pelvic organs are all affected by the spinal cord injury.
People with quadriplegia may have weak control or no control of their lungs and breathing muscles.
They may need specific help with coughing and breathing and in some high-level injuries may need
a ventilator to breathe. You'll find out pretty quickly if your loved one has quadriplegia or
paraplegia. Also, during your loved one's stay at the TraumaCare Center, he or she may be given a
diagnostic test that gives you more information about their injury and chances for improvement.
This test is called the International Standards for Neurological Classification of Spinal Cord
Injury, which was created by ASIA, the American Spinal Injury Association. Your doctor may refer
to this test simply as the ASIA exam or the ASIA ISCOS test. It's useful to correctly describe a
spinal cord injury and help determine future rehabilitation and recovery needs after discharge
from the TraumaCare Center. During the ASIA ISCOS examination, a member of your healthcare team
examines your ability to feel or your sensory function at multiple points on your body,
as well as your ability to move different muscles. This examination may be conducted at
any time after a spinal cord injury. Ideally, it is first given within 72 hours after the
initial injury at the TraumaCare Center. To determine your loved one's ASIA ISCOS scores,
the person giving the exam tests the patient's sensory and motor abilities and limitations.
He or she tests 28 points on both sides of the body to determine the sensation the patient can
feel, each with light touch and a pinprick. The patient's response is recorded on a 3-point scale,
0, 1, 2, for a total of 112. This total is called the Sensory Index Score, or SIS.
The doctor will also test motor or movement ability of 10 different muscles on both sides
of the body to see whether there is active movement, some movement without gravity,
or any movement against resistance. This total is called the Motor Index Score, or MIS, scored on
a 0 to 5 scale for a total of 100. Together, the SIS and MIS determine the patient's overall
level of injury and how severe the injury is. Then, an injury grade is assigned, which ranges
from A to E. This is the opposite of the grading system that most of us are used to in school.
A grade of A indicates a complete lack of motor and sensory function below the level of injury.
Grade B means that the patient feels some sensation below that same level.
Grade C means some weak movement is also possible. At grade D, there is further muscle function,
so that typically the patient has a better chance of walking again in some capacity,
whether it be assisted or unassisted. Grade E means that essentially all neurological function has returned.
Be sure to get as much information as you can about what your ASIA-ISCO score means from the
person performing your examination. It's often impossible for your doctor to make an exact
prognosis right away. We understand this can be frustrating, as you support your loved one at
this stage of recuperation. Recovery, if and when it occurs, typically starts between a week and
six months after an injury. Some people experience small improvements for up to a year or longer.
Beyond the major impairments of your loved one's spinal cord injury, there are a number of other
effects that he or she may experience. They may include limited loss of movement in specific parts
of the body and loss of sensation and ability to feel pain, heat, cold, and touch in the affected
areas. Some patients may report unusual or hypersensitive sensations. They may feel pain in
a part of the body where they cannot feel anything else. Injuries to the spinal segments may affect
the patient's control of bowel movements and urination. Patients without full control of their
bowel or bladder should start a program during their hospital stay to train the bowel and bladder
to empty at certain times and help avoid unwanted accidents. Persons with spinal cord injury may
experience exaggerated reflex actions or spasms, which are involuntary movements of a body part.
These can often be controlled or reduced with physical therapy and medications.
Sexuality may be affected by spinal cord injury. Men may notice changes in erection,
ejaculation, and sperm count and may experience reduced fertility. Women may notice changes in
lubrication, but there are no changes in the ability to become pregnant. There are resources
available to help patients regain and maintain healthy sexuality and fertility. Some patients
feel intense pain or stinging sensation caused by damage to the nerve fibers in the spinal cord.
This can be treated with medication and therapy.
At this time, we'll move on to Chapter 4.
Hi, I'm Kathy with Level Up RN.
In this video, we are going to talk about spinal cord injuries.
And at the end of the video, I'm going to give you guys a little quiz to test your knowledge
of some of the key facts I'll be covering in this video.
So definitely stay tuned for that.
And if you have our Level Up RN, medical surgical nursing flashcards, definitely pull those
out so you can follow along with me in this video.
Spinal cord trauma can be caused by hyper extension or hyper flexion or vertical compression
or rotational forces.
So that trauma will result in hemorrhaging and edema.
And this impairs circulation in the spinal cord, which results in ischemia.
So we can have a complete spinal cord injury, which causes the loss of all nerve function
below the level of the injury, or we can end up with an incomplete spinal cord injury,
which allows for some function below the level of the injury.
In terms of signs and symptoms of a spinal cord injury, this can include loss of motor
function, loss of sensation, loss of reflexes, as well as loss of bowel or bladder function.
Specific signs and symptoms will depend on the level of injury.
So if your patient has injury below the level of T1, then that will cause paraplegia, which
is paralysis or peresis, which means weakness of the lower extremities.
If they have injury to the cervical region, that will cause quadriplegia.
And that means they'll have paralysis or peresis of all four extremities.
So quad means four to help you remember that.
In terms of their muscle tone and bladder function, if the patient has injury to their
upper motor neurons, which occurs when they have an injury above L1 or L2, this will result
in hypertonia, which means that the patient will have a spastic muscle tone and a spastic
neurogenic bladder.
If they have injury to the lower motor neurons, meaning they had injury below the level of
L1 or L2, that will result in hypotonia.
So this means they'll have a flaccid muscle tone and a flaccid neurogenic bladder.
So we have a little cool chicken hit here on the card.
So hyper means high or above.
So if the injury occurs above L1 and L2, then they're going to end up with hypertonia.
And then hypo means low or below.
So if they end up with damage below the level of L1 or L2, then they will have hypotonia.
Medications that can be used with a spinal cord injury include steroids to decrease inflammation,
analgesics to address pain, and muscle relaxants for muscle spasms.
Other procedures that can help include a laminectomy, a spinal fusion, as well as therapeutic
hypothermia.
So this has been shown to decrease bleeding and edema, which helps to improve the patient's
motor function and also decrease pain.
In terms of nursing care, we're going to want to stabilize the patient's spine.
We're going to want to maintain a patent airway.
So a patient who's had injury at the level of C4 or above is at high risk for respiratory
dysfunction.
So that's definitely something important to keep in mind.
We're also going to monitor for complications, which can include hemorrhage, neurogenic shock,
as well as autonomic dysreflexia.
So if your patient has injury to the cervical region, they may end up in a halo traction
device.
If you look in your nursing textbook, you will likely see someone looking very unhappy
in this device.
And really you can't blame them because it's pretty intense.
So if your patient is in halo traction, you want to make sure you move your patient as
a unit.
You never want to apply pressure to these rods or like move the patient by pulling on
those rods.
Those rods are connected to their skull.
So again, you're going to move the patient as a unit.
You want to make sure there is a wrench or screwdriver attached to the vest, which is
part of that halo device, so that you can remove the vest in the event of emergency,
like if you need to do CPR on the patient.
Let's now get into a little more detail about the complications of a spinal cord injury,
starting with neurogenic shock.
With neurogenic shock, we have autonomic nervous system dysregulation following a spinal
cord injury.
It typically occurs when the injury is above T6.
So the pathophysiology behind this complication is that the spinal cord injury causes loss
of sympathetic nervous system activity, so we have unopposed parasympathetic nervous
system activity.
And this causes instability in heart rate, blood pressure, and temperature regulation.
So key symptoms of neurogenic shock include hypotension, bradycardia, as well as flushed
and warm skin.
So treatment will include the administration of IV fluids, vasopressors, as well as atropine
to try to get that heart rate back up.
The next complication I want to talk about is autonomic dysreflexia.
This is where we have life-threatening hypertension following a spinal cord injury.
And the pathophysiology behind this complication is that we have some kind of stimuli going
on below the level of the spinal cord injury, such as a distended bladder, that is initiating
a sympathetic response in the body.
And this is causing vasoconstriction and an increase in blood pressure.
And the parasympathetic nervous system is unable to compensate.
So symptoms of autonomic dysreflexia include extreme hypertension, a severe headache, blurred
vision, and diaphoresis.
So in terms of nursing care, your number one priority is to sit the patient up.
And you want to notify the provider, loosen any restrictive clothing, and address the
underlying cause.
So if it is a distended bladder, you may need to catheterize the patient.
If the patient already has an indwelling catheter in place, then you should check the tubing
for any kinks, which can cause urine to back up into the bladder and cause distension.
Another example of a stimuli that can trigger autonomic dysreflexia is a fecal impaction.
So if that is the case, you may need to manually disinfect your patient.
So in addition to addressing the underlying cause, you want to administer antihypertensive
agents as prescribed and closely monitor your patient's blood pressure.
All right, time for a quiz.
I have three questions for you.
First question, a spinal cord injury above L1 will likely result in spastic muscle tone
and a spastic neurogenic bladder.
True or false?
The answer is true.
Question number two.
What complication of a spinal cord injury results in hypotension and bradycardia?
The answer is neurogenic shock.
Question number three.
If your patient exhibits extreme hypertension following a spinal cord injury, what is your
priority action?
The priority action is to sit the patient up.
That's the first thing you do.
All right, I hope this video has been helpful.
Take care and good luck with studying.
Because if there's kinks in the tubing, that can cause urine to black up to the bladder.
I invite you to subscribe to our channel and share a link with your classmates and friends
in nursing school.
If you found value in this video, be sure to hit the like button and leave us a comment
and let us know what you found particularly helpful.
Spinal cord injury has been a major challenge for science for decades and the reason is
that the central nervous system which sends messages between your brain and the rest of
your body has very limited capacity to repair after injury.
At the moment the only options for patients of spinal cord injury includes
anti-inflammatory drugs and of course physical rehabilitation. However we have
not seen anything in the horizon that covers the broad spectrum of regenerative processes
that we have seen in our experiments.
And so here are our tiny fibers trying to have
encounters with those receptors. Well if the molecules are dancing around or
leaping out of the fibers the probability that they will meet up with the receptors is increased.
We recognize this as a new concept that had never been done and had remarkable success in
improving the recovery after spinal cord injury. We are definitely headed for the FDA to seek
approval for use of our normal therapy in clinical trials and we are very excited about this
possibility that will make a huge difference to patients. I cannot tell you how excited I am
about this work. This is probably the most important paper I have ever written and it describes a piece
of science that was truly unknown.
We have come very far with the use of stimulation to restore walking after spinal cord injury.
But we know that a complete solution will require regrowing the injured spinal cord.
So five years ago, we uncovered the fundamental requirements to regrow axons across complete
spinal cord injury.
In contrast to what we thought would occur, none of the animals recovered the ability
to walk.
So in this study, we took this concept one step further and uncovered a fundamental requirement
to achieve restoration of neurological function.
And that is, one needs to regrow the axons of a specific subpopulation of neuron and
guide them to their natural terminal region in the lumbar spinal cord.
So if we need to regrow a specific kind of neuron to a specific place, how do we know
which neuron to grow and where to grow it to?
So to answer that question, we turned to nature.
We use single cell technologies, which allow us to study every kind of cell in the spinal
cord and every kind of neuron that is in the spinal cord and how it reacts when animals
spontaneously recover the ability to walk.
And so when we did this, we again, we found that there was one kind of neuron and that
this neuron had to be regrown for the animals to recover the ability to walk.
And when we re-grew it, they walked, and then we shut those neurons down and prevent them
from working, the animals stopped walking.
We used a cocktail of growth factors that we up-regulated using a gene therapy approach.
And importantly, we used these growth factors to guide the axons all the way down into the
lumbar spinal cord where they need to be.
And when this occurs, it's possible to improve recovery after complete paralysis.
There are many obstacles to translate this regenerative approach into a gene therapy
that can be applied in humans, but we have already initiated the development of such
technology with the ultimate goal to combine gene therapies with spinal cord stimulation
in order to maximize the recovery of function after spinal cord injury.
The spinal cord is a very important part of our central nervous system, the overall system
that controls and coordinates the activities of our bodies.
Our brain is surrounded by the skull, while our spinal cord is surrounded by rings of
bone called vertebrae, and both are covered by a protective membrane.
Together, the vertebrae and membrane make up our spinal column, or our backbones.
The backbone, which protects our spinal cord, starts at the base of our skull and ends just above our hips.
The spinal cord is about 18 inches long and extends from the base of the brain down the middle of the back
to just below the last rib in the waist area.
The main job of the spinal cord is to be the communication system between the brain and the body
by carrying messages that allow us to move and feel sensation.
Our spinal nerve cells, called neurons, carry the messages to and from the spinal cord.
These messages leave the spinal cord through openings in the vertebrae.
Spinal nerve roots branch off the spinal cord in pairs, one going to each side of the body.
Each nerve has a specific job for movement and feeling.
You can tell the muscles in your arms, hands, fingers, legs, toes, chest, and other parts of your body when and how to move.
When a spinal cord injury occurs, sensation and movement may be interrupted, resulting in a temporary or permanent loss of function and paralysis.
In general, the higher on the spinal cord the injury occurs, the greater loss of function the person may experience.
The vertebrae are grouped into sections according to their location.
For example, the seven vertebrae in the neck are called the cervical vertebrae.
The vertebrae are numbered top to bottom from the head to the tailbone.
The top vertebrae is called C1, the next is C2, C3, and so on.
Cervical spinal cord injuries usually cause loss of function in the arms and legs, resulting in tetraplegia, which is also called quadriplegia.
The next 12 vertebrae are called the thoracic vertebrae.
The first T1 is where the top rib attaches.
Injuries in the thoracic region usually affect the trunk and legs and result in paraplegia.
The lumbar vertebrae are the five vertebrae in the lower back between the thoracic vertebrae, where the ribs attach, and the pelvis, or hip bone.
The sacral vertebrae run from the pelvis to the end of the spinal column.
Injuries to the five lumbar vertebrae, L1 through L5, and similarly to the five sacral vertebrae, S1 through S5, generally result in some loss of functioning in the hips and legs.
Whether the cause of a spinal injury or illness is traumatic or non-traumatic, the damage affects the nerve fibers passing through the injured area.
That can damage or weaken part or all of the corresponding muscles and nerves below the injury site.
Doctors have already or will assign your loved one a level of injury that corresponds to the damage below the injury.
In chapter 5, we'll explain more about these injury levels and how they can impact you or your loved one.
Right now, we'll move on to chapter 3 to inform you about some things that may occur soon after the immediate spinal cord injury or illness.
Welcome everybody again to another episode of the IDMB show that showed the profiles,
the humans behind the really big ideas that are shaping our world, inspiring future creators,
and for all those like really great stories, I'm Ira Pastor, your Exponential Health Ambassador
along for this journey today. Today we are going to move into the topic of spinal cord injury.
And the spinal cord injury is sort of broadly defined as any damage to the spinal cord that
causes either temporary or permanent changes to its function.
Symptoms of spinal cord injury may include loss of muscle functions, sensation, autonomic function,
parts of the body that are below the level of the injury. Injury can occur at any level of the
spinal cord and be either complete, which is defined as a total loss of sensation or function,
or incomplete, meaning that some nervous signals are still able to travel past the injured area.
Depending on the location and the severity of the damage, symptoms can vary from numbness to
paralysis to incontinence. Long-term outcomes vary widely from ultimately full recovery to
permanent quadriplegia, paraplegia, and complications can include muscle atrophy, pressure
sores, infections, breathing problems, a wide range of conditions. And currently it's estimated that
direct medical expenses for spinal cord injury in the United States can run into the millions of
dollars, not including lost wages and earning potential, and include spinal surgeries, trauma
care, rehabilitation, long-term care, medical equipment, and so forth. A recent estimate in
the United States has about 18,000 new spinal cord injury cases every year, and the total
number of patients living with spinal cord injury in the U.S. about 290,000. So today's
guest who's going to take us further into this theme, as well as to some of the most exciting
work going on in the development of innovative therapeutic interventions for spinal cord injury,
is Dr. Wise Young. Dr. Young is both an MD and a Ph.D. He is Distinguished Professor of Cell
Biology and Neuroscience, the founding director of the W.M. Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience,
and the Richard H. Schindel Chair of Neuroscience at Rutgers University. Dr. Young achieved his
doctorate in physiology and biophysics from the University of Iowa. He got a medical degree
from Stanford, and for the last few decades has committed himself heavily to bringing innovative
treatments to people's spinal cord injuries. He built and trained a 25-center clinical trial
network in China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, where phase 2 human clinical trials are going on right
now, and on the biblical cord blood mononuclear cell and lithium therapy. And he's also established
in clinical trial networks in the U.S., Norway, and India. Dr. Young led the team that ultimately
discovered and established high-dose methylprednisolone therapy as one of the first effective
therapies for spinal cord injury. This 1990 work really upended many concepts that spinal
cord injuries were permanent and really allowed research to refocus and open entire new directions
of investigation and hope. Dr. Young also developed the first standardized RAT spinal
cord injury model, used worldwide nowadays for testing therapies, formed the first consortium
funded by the National Institute of Health to Test Promising Therapies, and helped establish
several widely accepted clinical outcome measures of spinal cord injury research. Dr.
Young also founded and serves editor-in-chief of the journal Neurotrauma. He organized the
International and National Neurotrauma Society's forums for scientists to collaborate on spinal
cord injury and brain research, and he served on advisory committees for the NIH, the National
Academy of Sciences, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and many other
spinal cord injury advisory boards. His work has been featured broadly across numerous national,
international news sources and print publications. He's appeared on 2020 with Barbara Walters and
Christopher Reeve on the Today Show with Katie Couric, 48 Hours, Fox News, CNN, USA Today,
and in Time Magazine named him as America's best spinal cord injury researcher. Some of his many
honors include being the first researcher elected to the spinal cord injury hall of fame,
the NIH, Jacob Javits Newer Science Award, the Cure Award, the list I can read for the next
half hour. All this being said, Dr. Young, thank you really for taking the time to come on the
show today and share your knowledge with us. Thank you, Ira. Much appreciated. So typically,
we'd start off this show by giving our guests the floor for a little bit just to talk about
themselves. Obviously, in this area, there's not too many people that don't know about you,
but for those that are new to the field and learning about it, just go a little bit into
your background, where you grew up, how you got interested in science and physiology and medicine,
and ultimately how you found a home at this epicenter of neuroscience and trauma care.
I think you already covered most of my education. In 1977, I was an intern at Bellevue Hospital
when I took care of my first spinal cord injury patient. It was very emotional for me because
I think one of the things that all doctors hate is to feel helpless, to feel as if there's nothing
you can do. And I had a 17-year-old wrestler, and I used to be a wrestler in high school,
who broke his neck in a wrestling match, and I had to tell the parents that there was nothing we
could do. Shortly after that, I had the opportunity to write several grants to NIH and to my surprise,
I got them grants. I think by the time I was 29 years old and I was just into my neurosurgery
residency at that time, I had received over a million dollar grant from NIH to set up a group
to study spinal cord injury and several grants to look at different areas of spinal cord injury,
particularly in acute spinal cord injury. So I spent 20 years doing that, developing a therapy
that we could use for acute spinal cord injury. In 1997, I moved to Rutgers University where I
devoted myself to chronic spinal cord injury because there was nobody really addressing
that issue of people who are already spinal injured. And this is the, I would say, I think
honestly say that it's maybe one of the most hopeless groups of patients known. I mean,
doctors would go into their hospital rooms on the day of injury and tell them they'll never walk
again even before they examine the patient. So it was really a, it's a field where I,
you wouldn't even do that if somebody had cancer. They have no hope. This is really one of the most
hopeless conditions in human history that people have said that you will never walk again to many,
many patients. And so I decided to take on a subject that I think most of my colleagues believed
would be a waste of time. Even I think my mentor, my PhD mentor thought that I should
go do something else more useful. So as it turns out, a lot of dogmas were, I think, broken in
the last 10 years. Not by me necessarily, but by more than 100 laboratories have now shown that
animals can regenerate their spinal cord. And there's a lot of spontaneous regeneration going
on in the spinal cord. And we don't pay attention to it in part because a lot of this regeneration
does not result in function. And it's very difficult to see nerve fibers, which are called
axons to connecting. And we, two years ago, three years ago in 2016, we published the first
clinical trial showing that transplantation of the cells called umbilical cord blood mononuclear
cells into the spinal cord of people with chronic complete spinal cord injury, which you just defined.
People with no motor or sensory function below the injury site. These patients are chronic. They
are, our definition of chronic is you must be more than one year after injury and you must have
no neurological change over a six month period. So that's a reasonable definition
that you're complete. These are the patients who are told by all the doctors you'll never recover.
And so we took these patients, we transplanted them with umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells,
which have been matched for their for them. There are many umbilical cord blood banks all over
the world. And we we use something called human leukocyte antigen HLA matching to make sure that
the cells would not be rejected. And we transplanted this into the patients we did. We published a
study 27 patients in 2016. We did this is what is called an escalating dosing trial. We started out
with a low dose. We gave double that dose and then double that dose to the patients.
And we did a phase one phase two trial. The first phase is to show safety. We found that it was
quite safe to transplant these cells. No patient loss in the function. There was no deaths, no
severe adverse events associated transplants. Then we and this was done in Hong Kong at the two
flagship hospitals in Hong Kong. This is the Hong Kong University and the Chinese University of
Hong Kong. Really two of the best hospitals in the world. And we found that it was safe. We did a
test that's called diffusion tensor imaging, which shows fibers in this spinal cord. We
saw fibers grow across the injury side and we were really quite excited, but none of the patients
recovered any function. We were very disappointing. But then we went to the phase two trial, which was
in Kunming. Kunming is the capital of Yunnan province, which is the southernmost province of
China. There was an army hospital there that really did something very unusual. They're taking
patients after spinal cord injury and walking them six hours a day, six days a week for six months.
Called us the 666 program. And when they do this after injury, many of the patients recover
function. I mean, as many as half of the patients recover walking. And that's of course because
many patients are incomplete. And when you exercise them, they do walk. And we found that some patients
with complete spinal cord injury is also recovered. But nobody had ever tried walking patients that
were chronic completely. So in the trial that we carried out in Kunming, we did 20 patients.
We randomized them to five treatment groups. The first three treatments were low dose, medium
dose, high dose, and then high dose plus a steroid drug called methyl penicillin, which
we found really makes the cell survive better. And the third is the high dose of mononuclear
cells plus methyl penicillin plus a six week course of lithium, which we showed in animals,
improve the effects of these cell transplants. And the results are actually quite surprising.
Well, first of all, without even looking at the different therapies, just overall,
at the end of one year, we found that 75% of the patients are walking. 40% of the patients walked
with what we call minimal assistance. The other steps are weak. So, so their knees would buckle.
So we had people walking behind them with ropes tied around the knees to sort of lock the knees
as they are standing so their knees won't buckle and they wouldn't fall. They're standing in a
rolling walker in which they're pushing the walker or somebody's pulling the walker and
they're taking steps. They are walking like this six hours a day. And many of them actually,
amazingly, you know, they look like in really good shape. I mean, if you walk six hours a day,
imagine, you'd be really in good shape, right? Actually, we wanted to add an extra six to the
666 because many of these patients got six packs on their bellies because their core muscles actually
improve a lot when you're walking six months. And you can see the muscles up here. But anyway,
75% 15 out of the 20 patients we treated actually recovered walking, 35% of which actually walked
without any assistance. And many of them stopped using their wheelchairs. And even more surprising
was the fact that 65% of the patients no longer needed to catheterize themselves when they urinated.
This was a bit of a shock to us because we didn't realize this. In fact, we didn't expect this to
happen. So we didn't find out until we unblinded the study that this actually was happening.
And what these patients found was that if they use two fingers, they tap themselves in the
super pubic region, you know, where the bladder is, and the bladder is full, you know, they'll start
peeing. And once the peeing starts, it just completes itself when they catheterize themselves.
Again, there's no more urine in there for them. And so 65% of our patients no longer use catheters
to the bathroom. The other thing that's very impressive was that many patients with chronic
complete spinal cord injury, they have severe constipation. I mean, this is something that
happens. About 40, 50% of the patients actually can't go to the bathroom without digital manipulation
or putting suppositories in to stimulate the bowel movements. And so what happens is that
many patients are really disturbed by the fact that their loved ones have to do that to them
and have to help them do all these procedures. And I think many people would just tell me that this
is the worst thing in their lives, that they become dependent on somebody else having to
do their bathroom functions for them. So now we found out that nearly 60% of the patients
have normal regular bowel movements, and they don't need somebody to do digital manipulation
or suppositories for them at all. And even more important, at this one month, at the one year
period when we examined them, they told us that they have not had an accident in three months.
In other words, they've become continent. Now, both the bowel and bladder function actually
appeared late. We had the patients in a hospital for six months, and then we sent them home.
And we didn't find out about this until we did our one year follow up on the patients.
So here it is, we have a therapy that restores walking in about 75% of the patients by one year.
65% of the patients are recovering bowel and bladder function. If you ask people with spinal
cord injury, what do they want most in their lives? They will tell you, we want to walk,
we want to pee, we want to poop. And finally, if they're young, they want sex. And a bunch of them
told us that they're getting better erections and better ejaculation.
Wow. All the of life. Now, this is obviously a small trial. And I have to say,
we published this in 2016. And I think there has not, probably you haven't even heard about this
study. It was published in a relatively good journal, but we didn't go to the press. We didn't
hold press conferences. What we did was we applied to the FDA to do the trial in the U.S.
So they gave us permission last year to start the trial. And we're going to start the trial
probably in the next month. The trial will involve hospitals in New York,
state, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. We're going to be randomizing 27 patients,
the three treatment groups here in the U.S. One of the treatment groups will be no treatment at all.
One of the groups will receive the cell transplants. One of the groups will receive
cell transplants and lithium. We're omitting the metal prunisal. Because we found out that
the metal prunisal didn't seem to help. We want to confirm that lithium is beneficial or not.
So we have three treatment groups, a control group with no treatment, a group with cell transplant,
and a group with cell transplant and lithium. This is done at very good hospitals in the area,
Mount Sinai in New York City, Hackensack Medical Center in New Jersey, New Jersey Medical School,
Kessler, and also we're doing this in a rehab center called Good Shepherd in Pennsylvania.
So in Allentown. So anyway, these are very, very good centers and actually the hardest part
about organizing this trial was actually finding rehabilitation centers that are willing to walk
our patients six hours a day, six days a week, six nights a week. People look at me and they say,
are you crazy? Can we do 333? I said, what do you mean 333? We'd like to walk them three hours a
three days or three months. And you know, there's a very interesting that it's the rehab people
that's giving us the pushback. The surgeons say, oh no problem, we can transplant. It's a three-hour
skin-to-skin surgery and the safety is very well established. Very extensive animal studies that
does not make tumors. By the way, umbilical cord blood cells have now been used to treat 30 or 40
thousand people for many conditions. And it's never been shown to produce tumors. And these cells
are essentially fetal cells. They're newborn baby cells that produce a lot of growth factors. And
what we found was that lithium stimulates these cells to produce more growth factors. We transplant
them into the spinal cord around the injury site and find that they migrate into the injury site,
form a bridge. Then when we give lithium or even without lithium, they're producing a lot of growth
factors. And the nerve fibers follow them across the injury site and they grow all the way across.
And what we found was that if you don't exercise the patients and there were eight patients in
Hong Kong where we treated these patients, they get nothing back. They don't get on bladder function
back. They don't get walking back. Nothing. We just see fibers growing across the injury site.
But if we treat them and then we have them walk 666, they get motor function back and bound bladder
back. So after that study was finished in 2016, we went on ahead and did another trial that has
not yet been published. And this trial was actually very surprising. This has been full of surprises
for me anyway. We did 30 patients. We randomized them to surgery only with no cell transplants,
just exposing the spinal cord. Then we had a group of patients that got no surgery and we
walked both groups 666. We were quite surprised to find that one year, one out of four patients
in both groups recovered walking. But not great walking. It's worse than our treated patients.
But to our surprise, patients in both groups recovered bowel and bladder function.
So it's like the bowel and bladder recovery occurs even if you don't put cells into the
patients. If you walk them 6 hours a day, 6 days a week or 6 months, they actually will recover
bowel and bladder function. And so what's going on here? Well, first of all, I want to point out,
even though the patients can walk long distances and many of 35% are no longer using the wheelchairs
at all, these patients cannot move their legs voluntarily. They're lying down, they're prone,
we say, move your legs, move your legs, and they cannot move their legs. Wiggle your toes,
they can't move their toes. But once we put them on their feet, their vestibular reflexes,
their anti-gravity reflexes, you know, kick in, and they're able to take steps.
Sure. And they can walk long distances and they don't need to use their wheelchairs anymore.
And even much better than that, none of the patients in our trial actually showed any
de-cubi-dye, which are pressure source, or urinary tract infections. Because I think
standing up 6 hours a day is very, very good for your bladder.
I can imagine. So given this, we applied to the US FDA to do this trial in the US because,
you know, people would not accept just a trial in China. So the US FDA gave us permission and we
did extensive studies showing that it's safe, et cetera. But what is most interesting was that
the US FDA forced us to do a control group, a no-treat control group. So I argued with them.
I said, look, you know, patients that don't get surgery, they know they didn't get any surgery.
So you can't blind that, right? And I said, those patients who don't get surgery won't work as hard
as those patients that receive surgery because they believe they receive the therapy they know.
I was also afraid that none of the patients would want to be randomized to a third possibility of
getting no therapy. Just sure. We were quite surprised to find out when we talked to our spinal
cord injury community that they don't mind that. As one of them said to me, you know,
here, you're coming to me and you're saying, you're going to put some cells into my spinal
cord. And then two weeks later, I'm going to go spend six hours a day. Then I'm going to start
walking. And I'm going to walk six hours a day. Are you nuts? I mean, I haven't walked for, and
by the way, our patients in the study were from two to 20 years after spinal cord injury. These
patients haven't walked in that long. They said, I'm not going to walk in two weeks. Time start to
walk and do all these things. You're crazy. In fact, they said, because we offered in all the
control patients, if they don't receive the controls at the end of one year, we'll give them the
treatment. Okay. They said, wow, we would prefer to be in that group. They said, we want to be
pre-trained and then get the cells and get six months of walking again. They'll say, they said to us,
I'll bet you will walk better than those other guys. So there's a certain amount of
competition involved, but there is no difficulty, no problems accepting being assigned to the control
group as long as they will receive the therapy at one year. They think we'll do better. So this is
the trial. We're going to do that. We're going to start that probably in beginning of December.
It's already been announced in the clinicaltrials.gov. And we've taken a lot of time. We didn't
hold any news conferences, but I've talked to thousands of people with spinal injuries. So
they understand what this trial is about, why they're going to do it, why exercise is necessary,
et cetera, et cetera. So by the end of next year, we'll know whether we can replicate the China
experience. In the meantime, we're starting trials in India and Taiwan. Okay. And we're holding off
on doing it in mainland China because that's where we originally did the trial. But we wanted to
make sure we can do it in Taiwan. Taiwan, we're going to do a very special trial. We're going to
go ahead and do what is called a surgical control. We're just going to operate on the patients
without transplanting cells. Now, the reason why we did this other trial with 30 patients,
where we operated and didn't put any cells into them, was to see whether there's any benefit or
harm from doing that. And what we found was that amazingly, those patients that got surgery,
no cell transplants recovered by our own bladder function. So in Taiwan, the patients are very
happy to be randomized to this, and they'll get to treatment at the end of one year.
So we're going to do these three trials. The U.S. one will probably start first
in December and January, February, we'll start Taiwan, India. And then depending on the results
of these trials, if we replicate our China experience, we will go ahead and do a phase
three pivotal trial. And I'm, of course, hoping that phase three will confirm the results of the
phase two and that we will get worldwide regulatory approval. Right now, the whole field,
everybody in the field is so pessimistic, they aren't willing to believe anything.
You cannot convince them with a 20 patients trial or a 28 patient trial, which is what we had in
China. They have to see it on a multi-center trial involving hundreds of patients. And so that we're
going to give that to them. You know, to reverse human history, you have to do, you know, this is
what I guess, just like the invasion of Kuwait or whatever, this is like overwhelming force.
You have to do that. Because once you open that door, what will happen is that many, many
other people will say, I can do that too. The Me Too syndrome in pharmacology is very, very
powerful. Everybody will want to do it. It must be extremely fulfilling for you to see
it scale up finally in this context. And yeah, I know, you know, having come out of the
pharma industry for years that, you know, they fight against you all the time. And then they
say, oh, it was self-evident. Then you would succeed. But yeah, I mean, it's truly amazing.
I mean, just as I don't have a side note, the whole situation with the controls, you know,
with the surgery and some improvement in terms of the bowel function and the bladder function,
are there any theories about why that is? All these three functions are mediated by
central pattern generators in the lumbosacral spinal cord. I mean, look, I don't know if you've
ever tried to stop midstream when you're peeing. It can't sneeze either.
But once that program starts, it's hard to stop. And it just finishes. I mean, it's programmed
into your spinal cord. Same thing with when you defecate, right? It's hard to stop it. Same thing
with walking. Walking actually is a program that is located in your L1 spinal cord. By the way,
that's one of the reasons why we limit the trial to C5 to T11. We don't want people who have lumbosacral
damage, which might damage the central pattern generators part of the trial. Although we will
do them in a separate trial later on, at least at the present time, our current theory is that
these centers are still intact, that there are fibers that have grown. They're non-specifically
activating these centers in order to get these functions. And they can do that after extensive,
intensive training. So that's the theory. Very interesting. And we found that actually,
even without transplanting cells, that 60% to 80% of the patients are able to recover
bowel and bladder function just from 666 walking six hours a day, six days for six months. Now,
this requires a tremendous amount of commitment from our patients. I mean, if you're walking six
hours a day, six days, you're not going to be working. You're just going to be devoting yourself
to doing this. So what do I see as the future? I see it as this being an absolutely necessary
step for recovery of function in a system that hasn't worked for years. You're going to take
somebody who has chronic spinal cord. I mean, if you've had a cast on your legs for, let's say,
three months, I guarantee you, you'll find that all your muscles have atrophy. Same thing happens
with spinal cord. The spinal cord will undergo atrophy. To rebuild that, you really have to put
in the work and the time to retrain the whole system in order to work. And so our spinal cord
injury community has accepted this, I think, very basic notion. But the doctors have not yet.
There are three clinical trials carried out in the last four years, which involve no exercise.
And they stopped the trials. They shut down the therapies. I don't think it is because the cells
don't necessarily work. I think it's because they didn't exercise the patients.
It's a fascinating finding. It sounds kind of obvious, just listening to you talk about it.
You wonder why no one's picked that up, but it says something about you and the way you think
about this. Going to the cells themselves, I mean, it seems that you're putting a lot of time into
the neonatal blood monocular cells. But when I look at your research, you've been very active
with other types of stem cells as well, neural stem cells, mesenchymal and so forth.
And also, you've done work in the area of these different inhibition factors to prevent
teratoma formation as far as the pluripotent or the embryonic stuff's concerned.
The monocular cord blood cells sort of where you're primarily focused now,
are you also still looking at various different types of stem cells?
We have to choose a cell that's practical. That's safe. So there are, you know, umbilical cord blood
has been now collected since 1989. There are about 100 some odd cord blood banks all around the world
that have collected umbilical cord blood. They're using this to treat cancer, you know, bone marrow
problems and thalassemia, you know, sickle cell anemia, et cetera. And it has a very, very strong
safety record. And now they're even using a treat autism and other things. But um, the cells are
available. That's one, the cells are absolutely safe. And number three, it's affordable. It's not
like, you know, induced pluripotent stem cells, which may cost a ton of money because you have to
make a custom cell for you. All you have to do is the same thing we people do for, for, you know,
umbilical cord blood cell transplants. The expensive part of this is really not the cells.
The most expensive part is the walking training. But then, but then what we're doing is we're trying
to save a lot of money by introducing non-medical people to do the walking. You don't, you don't
need a physical therapist to walk the patients you need. And we're using undergraduate students.
I can tell you, um, athletes, you know, we had a spinal cord injury at Rutgers, you know, several
years ago. And oh my God, every athlete wants to come and help. There's a group of people called
kinesiologists there. And they're, they want to do this. And many of our science students,
they want to walk the patients. It's like the fulfillment of, of their science to see the
results come out. And so, so we are actually very excited that we can do this. You know,
the vets, the veterans come to me and they've said, you know, um, can we come to New Jersey,
get the cells and go back to our own VA to walk? You know, there are like 57,000 vets with complete
spinal cord injuries in the United States, you know, being taken care of at the, at the VA hospitals.
So I said, sure, but you know, we've got to get the walking program started in the VA. So I told
them that I would. So I went down to the, the Atlanta, the VA hospital in, in, I'm sorry, in
Augusta, Georgia. It's the largest active duty spinal cord injury center. I'm very committed to
walking. And you know what they said to me when I told them that in our trial, not a single patient
got a urinary tract infection or a decubitus, a pressure sore. Okay. They says, do you know,
80% of our, of our admissions for our spinal cord injury patient base is for these two conditions,
urinary tract infection or decubidine. They said, why are you talking about walking? You have a cure
and urinary tract infections. And they said each admission to us is over $200,000.
So, so they're saying, look, why don't you come and walk the patients?
You know, walking program. So this helps with the decubidine and the urinary
tract infections. And this will pay for itself. I said, wow, that's a great idea. So we're going
to try to do that. And we're really hoping, you know, there, one of the things that we know in
the VA is that there's a very high suicide rate amongst vets. Okay. And as it turns out,
many of the suicides are occurring in people with spinal cord injury, you know, and everybody,
you know, they get their legs blown off or they get something, they're fixed, they go back. People
who have spinal cord injury, they can't get fixed. And they don't go back to work. They don't go back
to do or doing all the things that they can do. And so a lot of people just can't get back to work
when they have spinal cord injury. If we have something that restores bowel and bladder and
gets patients walking again, the suicide rate should go down. It was very interesting that
the Michael Jackson family, the Jackson Family Foundation actually approached us to see if
they could help do a VA system wide program for walking people with spinal cord injury.
And then doing this thing on a large scale. So we're actually very, very excited about doing
this in the US and then also doing this around the world. We're hoping to establish a new model.
Should not be all medical. I think the 666 walking program should be done in part by
non-medical people. Need to be a physical therapist in order to walk a patient. You
need to have some muscles and determination, right? Absolutely. And what is so interesting
is that people with spinal cord injury, they understand this innately that they have to
exercise in order to walk. And they understand it better than we do. So we're hoping to change
the world with this. And we think that this is going to be true not only of spinal cord injury,
but also stroke, multiple sclerosis, peripheral nerve diseases. All the neuro disabilities will
also require this kind of exercise. And we need to have a model where it doesn't cost a million
dollars to do this. And by the way, if we can argue with the VA that this is worth a $200,000
admission to the VA for UTI, Neural Tract Infections, and the Cupid Eye, insurance companies will
be very glad to cover this in program. And so we want to start this not only in the United States,
but in India, China, and Europe. And Norway in particular in Europe has been very interested in
this. They give creative, grave medical care. It's the only country in the whole world that
basically said to me, wise, you come here, do the trial in Norway, we'll do it for free.
Hospitals will cover all the costs. And because they immediately understood that if they can get
the 4,560 patients in Norway walking again, peeing and pooping again on their own, they will save a
ton of money. I see that. So part of this is not only the science involved. It's really the social
structure involved to get these people out of their wheelchairs and walking again to give them hope.
So that's been my work for the last 10, 15 years. It's been exciting. It's an exciting set of work.
And as I've followed you for years now, I'm a Rutgers graduate myself. And it's fascinating
seeing, obviously, everything goes slower than it should in this field, but you've definitely
stayed with it. And it's amazing where we are today in 2019. Moving a little back to you now,
you mentioned early on, I usually ask a question about influencers in your life. And you mentioned
along the way, there were some people that said, you know, wise, you should get out of this stuff
now. It's not worth your time. Anyone of you specifically want to give a shout out to in terms
of people that convinced you to stay with it. If it wasn't for them, you'd be doing
cardiology or something totally different that you might want to mention along the way.
Trained with a scientist. His name is Rudolfo Linas. He was my PhD mentor. And you know,
very proud of the fact that that he actually along the way changed his mind about things like
plasticity and regeneration. I think the neuroscience field itself has become has come
around to the concept of regeneration. They have come around to the concept that things will grow,
things will change their connectivity so that they will restore function. I don't think the
resistance is coming from the scientists. Also, I'm very grateful to the neurosurgeons with whom
I worked for 20 years at NYU. There are too many to mention, but I can tell you one thing. Neurosurgeons
are, they say, we can do this. It's only a three hour procedure. We can open up, expose the spinal
cord, we can inject the cells in. They're very excited about doing this. A lot of the pushback
that we have right now is from people who actually deal with the day to day lives of the people.
And for 30, 40 years, these people have been telling patients that they'll never walk again.
And it's very difficult to change their minds, their mindset. And so we're, and by the way,
I do not, I absolutely do not want to take bypass these people. I think these people are
absolutely critical that we need to buy in with this intensive exercise program. If they don't buy
in, then rehabilitation itself is in trouble. But rehabilitation really has to pay attention
to the fact that you have to train people to regain function. And it must find more efficient
ways of doing that. Technology will bring us a long ways because you can stimulate a muscle
10 times a second, but you can only take one step every two seconds. So can you imagine the future?
You'll be lying in bed, stimulating yourself. And you can do a lot of this stuff using technology,
not just by walking six hours a day, maybe while you're sleeping, exercise and reconnecting things.
I mean, there's a whole new world out there. And we need to actually start exploring this.
And it's such a common sense thing that at the beginning, if you've lost all your connectivity,
and you're getting new fibers getting in there, you've got to teach your brain what buttons to push.
If your brain doesn't know what buttons to push, you won't get any function.
Actually, sensory function is really important. You have to know what the incoming signals are.
How can it be the same? So you have to learn new signals. It's like watching your baby walk.
It takes them six months or longer to walk. So that's what we have to recreate in people
who have not been walking for 20 years or longer. So it's really an exciting time.
And we need to bring the rehabilitation doctors away from the negativity.
Basically, the theory right now in rehabilitation is to teach patients to learn to live with what
they have, to learn to live with disabilities. And so our goal is to teach them how to overcome
their disabilities, how to regain function. This is a brand new idea in this field.
I'm hoping that they will buy in. And they're going to be the generation of
rehabilitation doctors that will discover all these new ways of restoring function
that we always consider to be impossible. And this is going to be true not only of
spinal cord injury, but stroke, brain injury. Can you imagine that 90,000 people
with encoma, they have the same problem as sometimes spinal cord injury. They have parts
of the brains that they haven't used. So anyway, these things should be so obvious.
You know, it doesn't require a rocket scientist or somebody like me to say this.
But how come I don't know if you know the story that is really the saddest thing, I think,
in our, for humankind. You know, when somebody has had a cardiac arrest or severe brain injury,
they go into a coma. They're now, maybe from pressure from the insurance companies and so on,
they're pushing to unplug them after four months, after four weeks. They've changed the term
persistent vegetative state to permanent vegetative state, so that you give reason
to unplug them, even though they might awake three months, six months, a year later. That's
because of the cost. Also, it's because when they wake up, they are disabled. Of course,
if you've been comatose for six months, you're not going to be able to function very well with
your brain. And so this whole thing is going to extend because we need solutions for these
problems. By the way, these problems will bankrupt our medical care system. We need to solve them.
I think the answer is not going to be to kill them.
That's never the answer. And yeah, I'm in complete agreement with you on all these topics.
And I think one of the things is also just having hung around sort of the drug industry,
as long as they did. I mean, we've convinced everybody out there that the answers are just
going to be the little white pill that we get at the local pharmacy, and that's it. We don't have to
put any effort into it. And as you're showing, like any system, the spinal cord is its own little
ecosystem of things. It's biochemical. It's bio physical. It's biomechanics. And you can't just
think one little component of that system, a la systems biology, is going to be the single magic
bullet that they like to, you know, they like to give you in the farm industry. And I think what
you're doing is extremely important in sort of getting that message out there that you want to
walk again. Yes, there's cells, there's some lithium, there's some other supportive compounds,
but you got to get up and move and learn to walk again as well. So I think that's
extremely important. And just listening to your passion behind this, it's just, it's very inspiring.
So let me just take another two minutes of your time and take as long as you want. It's
fascinating. I'll tell you one other problem I've been now working on for the last five years.
You know, as soon as we got the results of this trial, I knew that
everybody with spinal cord injury would want this therapy. And umbilical cord blood cells,
although there are lots of umbilical cord blood banks, I think the total number of umbilical
cord blood units, each unit comes from one baby is about 900,000 in the world. I estimate that
there are about three million people with chronic complete spinal cord injury. Okay. Or chronic
incomplete, even incomplete, but severe disability is due to spinal cord injury, about three million
people. That if, let's say 10% of these people want this therapy every year, that's 300,000 people.
In three years, the total world supply of umbilical cord blood will be depleted.
It's like when there's nothing you can do, it's okay to sympathize and say, I'm sorry, you know,
there's no cells and there's no treatment. But when you do have a therapy that will restore
function or you better be able to deliver or people will get really, really upset. The other
thing that will happen is that when you put a squeeze on a resource, the prices go up.
It becomes unaffordable. So it becomes a therapy only for the rich. So I'm now with a, with a very
good friend who used to work at J&J, his name is Ken Jason. He and I have partnered up and we're
trying now to scale up the use of umbilical cord blood so that we can treat millions of people.
And wow, that's been an exciting effort. So for example, we currently only collect 5% of all
the cord blood in the world. 95% of the cord blood in the world is just thrown away. One of the things
is actually to collect a lot more cord blood. Sure. Number two is every unit of cord blood
contains 200 million mononuclear cells and we're using only 6.4 million to treat one patient.
So each unit can actually be used to treat 20 patients. Absolutely. So just those two factors
alone means that we can probably increase the number of cord blood cells available for treatment
for very little money. You know, you can do the math yourself. If we, let's say, increase the
collection rate to 20%, which is not that crazy. Finally, if we, if we collect all the cord buttons
split into aliquots so it can treat 20 patients, that alone will give you millions of units to
millions of doses that you can treat people with spinal cord injury. Now there have been all these
reports. More than 100 papers now have come out showing that umbilical cord blood cells are beneficial
for stroke. It may be beneficial for macular degeneration of the eyes. There's 200 million
people around the world and it may be useful for treating patients with renal disease like people
who are on dialysis today. When you, when you talk about these conditions, hundreds of millions of
people, you need that many cells to treat them. Currently no, no stem cell source can treat millions.
People are still thinking about treating 10 or 20,000. They're still thinking about charging
$300,000 for this therapy. So what we're now trying to do is, and I've set up a company to do this,
to provide a model where we can increase the collection rate and we reduce the price by a
hundredfold to make it affordable and that's to be affordable to the third world countries. And by the
way, it makes sense because third world countries have more babies than we do. India has 90,000
babies per day. It's not a cord blood. Yeah. And so, so, so part of this is solving the problem,
not just from a medical standpoint. We have to solve it from a social standpoint, from a societal
standpoint to make this an affordable therapy so that the exercise plus the cells together maybe
would cost, I don't know, 10,000, 20,000 dollars. If you do that, then it would benefit everybody in
the world. Anyway, so, so I've been working very hard on that part of it now, you know, besides
the clinical trials. That part I think is actually the most interesting and the most challenging.
This is a, because there's, there's technology involved. There's really a lot of, you know,
economics involved and just figuring out the solutions and getting the governments to, to, to
and we have to have private public partnerships and so on for just to get these things going.
And of course, I'm not going to be able to do all this. What is going to happen? I just,
I'm hoping to set things into place and have students and other people take it and run with it
to, to get the, to get the infrastructure set up. And then it has to be run by people,
really smart people to make it so that it would benefit the maximum number of people.
So this is what is really, really exciting to me. And I, you know, we have a lot of very,
very excited background students here. I can imagine. I can imagine. I've got whole bunches
of students working in the lab, not only that, volunteering to walk the patients to, to figure
out new ways of growing the cells, new ways of scaling the system so that, that we can get,
you know, right now it costs about $10,000 for one dose of the umbilical cord blood cells. I'd
like to get it down to a hundred. That would do, that would change everything.
And so, so, so, you know, these are the kinds of things that we're very excited about at Rutgers.
We've got a whole bunch of really, really smart students who want to do non-profit medicine.
And boy, I, it's, it's a really exciting time to be in, in education. Absolutely. Absolutely. I
can imagine. And I'm just glad to see it happening at Rutgers. Right, right near by.
You know, Dr. Yogi, it's, it's, it's been very inspiring and just hearing you,
you talk about all this and, you know, once again, your passion behind it. The fact you stayed with
it, which is a rare thing nowadays in this space. And I'm just really wishing you the best moving
forward. And once again, for everybody that's watching on the YouTube channel, but also will be
listening on, on the various radio networks, we've been spending time with the amazing Dr.
Wise Young, distinguished professor of cell biology and neuroscience, founding director
of the WM Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience and the Richard Schindel Chair of Neuroscience,
all at Rutgers University here on the, in the Northeast United States. Dr. Young,
really thank you so much for everything you do. Thank you for the time that you put into this.
And really, as we say, moving the, the human story forward, not just here in the U.S., but
everywhere. Thank you.
Welcome to this video on levels of spinal cord injury.
In this video, we'll look at the spinal cord and why, at different levels, if there is
injury, why we see different symptoms.
Firstly, let's make sense of this image.
Up the top, we have the brain, and this color-coded picture is essentially illustrating the spinal
cord.
For today, I want you to think of it like an elevator.
So this elevator is going up and down 31 different floors of a building.
Up the top, we have the penthouse, which is the brain, and these are all the levels
as we move down.
Now what we're going to do is break the spinal cord into color-coded into its different
regions.
So at the top, closest to the brain, we have the cervical region, and here we have eight
nerves coming out which supply the area of the body around the neck region.
So this has eight levels.
So we call it C1 to C8, cervical 1 to cervical 8.
Eight spinal nerves coming out and in at this region.
The next level, we have 12 thoracic, so we call this T1 to T12.
Next we have the lumbar region, which is L1 to L5, so there's five levels here.
And then finally, we finish off with a sacral, and there's five of those, so we call it S1
to S5.
Today, I've left out the coaxial, which also has one, but essentially this gives you the
31 levels of the spinal cord.
Now just for a brief overview of each part, the cervical region is going to supply and
provide sensations to the neck, the shoulders, and the upper arm.
The thoracic is going to supply motor movement, as well as sensory to the thorax and abdomen.
The lumbar is the lower back, the hip and the legs.
The sacrum is the lower part of the legs, and then finally the pelvis, which is going
to be for bowel and bladder and sexual function.
So any one of these regions that have an injury is going to essentially impact those functions
that we just mentioned.
Before I get on to the levels of injury, I just want to make clear that no injury is
the same.
Even though it might occur at the same level, spinal cord injury can be at different degrees
of severity.
So some can be complete, some can be partial, some can be at one side, some can be centrally,
so they're never going to be completely the same, at least in their symptoms.
Now let's start with the cervical region.
So this is essentially going to be impacting the neck, going down to the limbs, but one
of the first things I want to point out is the nerves that are controlling the breathing
muscle.
So approximately C3 to C5 is going to send a nerve out that goes to the diaphragm, which
is a breathing muscle.
So any injury above C3 is going to cause impairment to this muscle, which means the person won't
be able to use their diaphragm, therefore they can't breathe on their own, and they
will need a ventilator.
By and large, an injury to the cervical region is going to impact everything below it.
So it's going to impact the arms and the legs.
So usually this is referred to as quadriplegia or tetriplegia.
As we start to move down the cord of the cervical region, we start to see the outflow region
to the limbs, and this is predominantly C5 to T1.
So those regions are sending nerves in and out to the arms.
So the further the injury is down from C5 down to towards T1, there's going to be a
greater degree of sensation and motor control of the arms until we get to T1, which basically
would mean that an injury at T1 level, you would have control to the neck, the shoulder
and the arms, but anything below that will be impacted.
Now injuries of the thoracic region is going to have an impact in the thorax and the abdomen,
particularly the muscles for balance and posture.
So there will be challenges with posture and proprioception, which means knowing where
the trunk and the body is in space.
Another function of the thoracic region is a part of the nervous system we call the autonomic
nervous system or the sympathetic nervous system, which controls blood pressure, heart
rate, sweating, etc.
So if there is an injury about T5 and above, this will impact this system and therefore
there can be a dissyndrome known as autonomic dysreflexia, which impacts blood pressure,
heart rate, sweating, headaches, etc.
As we start to move to the lumbar region, we will see that the thoracic and cervical
region is intact, but will have dysfunction in the lumbar and sacral regions.
So specifically in the lumbar, this is going to impact the muscles around the hips, the
muscles going down to the thigh and the muscles in the lower links.
So this is going to impact walking.
As we move into injuries of the sacral region, walking most likely would be okay because
the sacral region only impacts the lower leg.
But the most profound effect is going to be control to the bowel, the bladder and sexual
function.
So now hopefully you have a better understanding of why when there are spinal cord injury at
different levels, we see different types of symptoms.
Hi everybody, Dr. Mike here. In this video, I want to talk to you about what happens to the spinal cord after injury.
Now you can divide spinal cord injury up into what's happening in the primary injury and the secondary injury.
Simply put, the primary injury is the direct mechanical trauma that's occurring at the spinal cord and usually
it's some form of impact with persistent compression.
What I'm referring to here is the fact that the spinal cord is surrounded by the vertebral column,
which are bones and those bones can fracture and break and fragments of those bones can impact the spinal cord directly.
This is mechanical trauma and you can see I've shown some mechanical trauma or damage to the spinal cord here.
Now in the primary injury, what you're going to find is that there's disruption of axons.
So remember, you've got a neuron, a neuron has the body of the neuron, the axon,
and that just sends the electrical signal and then the end of the neuron.
So you've got damage of these axons, which means no signals being sent.
And you've also got damage to the cell membranes.
So remember the cells within the spinal cord, they're neurons and glia supporting cells.
Cells that surround the neurons that provide it nutrients and make sure its environment's okay.
Disruption of the cell membrane simply means that this membrane that surrounds it is broken and all the components inside the cell
leaks out. This is what's happening in the primary injury phase.
Now the secondary injury phase is what's happening minutes to months and sometimes years after the initial spinal cord injury.
And it's characterized by a whole cascade of events.
These events include vascular damage, ion imbalances, excitotoxicity,
free radical formation, inflammation, scar formation, I'm going to talk about all of these.
So the first thing I want to talk about is the initial spinal cord injury, the primary injury.
You've got direct damage potentially from bone fragments, but you also have vascular damage.
The blood vessels are affected. Now there's three large arteries that feed the spinal cord.
They're rarely affected in this case.
But what you're going to find is the branches of these blood vessels, they're the ones that are affected.
These branches go into the spinal cord and they feed oxygen and nutrients to the cells of the spinal cord.
So the neurons and glia, they're usually what's affected. Now when they're affected, they're broken, they're damaged.
And what happens is all the fluid of the blood leaks out into the spinal cord.
What happens in this case? Well, if the fluid leaks out, it increases the pressure in the spinal cord.
Now increasing the pressure is further going to exacerbate mechanical injury.
Pushing pressure on the spinal cord is direct injury. So that exacerbates it.
But what about the cells that usually get fed by these broken blood vessels?
They're no longer getting fed. So that means these cells no longer get oxygen and they no longer get nutrients.
Now if they don't get oxygen and nutrients, it means the cells no longer make energy.
And without energy, many of the processes of the cells stop.
But think about this. If blood is leaking out, right, you've got around about five to six litres of blood inside of your body.
If that blood leaks out, your blood pressure drops.
So while the pressure at the spinal cord increases, your overall blood pressure diminishes.
And this results in something called shock. Shock is where your body doesn't get fed the oxygen and nutrients.
So your body responds. How does your body respond when it goes into shock?
It needs to try and bump blood pressure up. And the way it does it is activating that phytophyte system, sympathetic nervous system.
It tells all the intact blood vessels to constrict.
Now the problem here is it's going to tell blood vessels at the spinal cord that are intact to constrict.
And that further limits oxygen and nutrients and further causes cells not to produce any energy.
So what's going to be the outcome of cells not producing any energy?
Well, cell death, basically. The cells are going to die. But how does this process occur?
So firstly, when a neuron wants to send a signal, all that's basically happening is that there is sodium that sits outside the cell.
Now this sodium needs to jump into the neuron.
And it actually does this in a domino-like fashion, just jumps into the neuron like this.
And you can see if sodium jumps in, it's moving its way down the neuron, down the axon.
This is that electrical signal that your neurons send to tell your muscles to move and for you to be able to feel.
And what it results in is a whole bunch of sodium inside the cell.
But you can't send another signal because the sodium is trapped in the cell. You need to get that sodium out.
How do we get sodium out of the cell? Well, luckily we have pumps in all the cells of our body, including our neurons.
And what these pumps do is they take the sodium and they throw it back out.
And they do it by swapping sodium with potassium and throwing potassium in.
However, the important point here is to do this, we need energy.
Now the cells aren't producing any energy anymore because they're not getting any oxygen and nutrients.
No energy means this process isn't happening.
And sodium starts to accumulate inside of the neurons.
We don't want this. We don't want sodium accumulating in the neurons. We need to find a way to get it out.
Luckily there's another pump that our cells can use.
This pump swaps sodium that's inside the cell, swaps it for calcium that's sitting outside the cell.
Good old calcium. Swaps it, throws all this calcium inside the cell.
But the problem here is we start to accumulate huge amounts of calcium inside the cell.
And here's an important point.
Calcium influx, which you can see I've written here, calcium influx is a signal to tell cells to die.
So what happens here is the cell begins to die because of all this calcium influx.
If a cell dies, its membranes are disrupted and all of its components that are inside start to leak out.
They're not supposed to be leaking out. Some of these components because they're neurons are neurotransmitters.
And one really important neurotransmitter is glutamate.
Really important. What does glutamate do?
Glutamate is released from one neuron. I'll write it as G here.
And it binds to a receptor on another neuron.
And what it does is it tells that neuron to send a signal.
It's excitatory, right?
How does it tell it to send a signal? It tells it by throwing sodium inside the cell
and by throwing small amounts of calcium inside the cell.
Anything that has a positive charge it tries to throw inside because it's the positive charge that sends that signal.
But if you've got huge amounts of calcium, you throw in huge amounts of sodium, huge amounts of glutamate,
you throw in huge amounts of sodium, huge amounts of calcium and more cells die.
What you see is this cascading effect of cell death.
Now, what does the body do to try and stop this?
Luckily, our body has something called autophagy.
Auto means self-phagy or phage means to eat.
What this autophagy does is it goes along, it finds cells that are damaged, it encapsulates it
and it digests it and recycles it so that all these components don't leak out.
It's a protective mechanism.
So what research is doing at the moment, interestingly, is trying to boost autophagy.
And in animal models, it's shown to be beneficial for spinal cord repair and regeneration.
But what other research is shown to do is think about it.
If one of the problems here is throwing that sodium out and throwing that calcium in,
why don't we just block that channel?
And we do.
There is research showing that sodium-calcium channel blockers have shown to be beneficial
for spinal cord repair and regeneration in animal models.
What else could we do?
Well, we've shown that this excited toxicity of glutamate, too much glutamate being released,
binding to the cell causes more death.
So why don't we just block the receptor?
And we do.
And that's some research as well showing to be beneficial for spinal cord repair and regeneration.
The other thing that's happening in this process is inflammation.
Now, inflammation occurs any time there's damage to tissue that has a blood supply.
So that's happening here.
Now, inflammation is good and bad.
Inflammation, I always say, is like a friend that's come over to visit.
In the short term, great.
In the long term, you get sick and tired of it.
That's inflammation.
What inflammation does is it cleans and repairs.
That's what it does.
Cleans and repairs, which sounds great.
But the problem is it's a nonspecific response that the body has.
It's nonspecific.
So it doesn't know that this is the spinal cord that it's doing.
It could be the skin, for example.
So what it does is it promotes autophagy.
It promotes cell death and wipes everything away and rebuilds.
But what it rebuilds is not more neurons.
It's not more glia.
It's like breaking a house down and rebuilding a wall.
But in this case, it's rebuilding a wall on a highway.
And it's blocking the highway.
And that's what's happening.
And this is a scar formation.
Now, this scar that's being formed, we call a glial scar.
And the reason why it's called a glial scar
is because glial cells like astrocytes and microglia
are promoting this inflammatory response to form the scar.
And it's not as simple as just stopping these things
because we need this cleaning and repairing to happen.
Because remember, blood vessels are damaged, for example.
Now, if a blood vessel is damaged,
the barrier between the blood supply and the spinal cord
has gone.
So anything that's in the blood can now
go into the spinal cord and damage it.
So we need to repair this blood spinal cord barrier.
So this process of activating astrocytes and microglia
to clean and repair is actually good in some ways,
but detrimental in others.
So what we're trying to do with our spinal cord research
is try to identify ways to promote the cleaning
but inhibiting that scar formation.
And this is a quick summary of what's
happening in primary injury and secondary injury
of spinal cord damage.
Hi everybody, Dr Mike here.
In this video I want to talk to you about how our brain controls motor movement or activities.
Now in one of my previous videos I spoke to you about if we were to do a transverse section
through the spinal cord and look into the spinal cord, bird's eye view, you see a couple
of important anatomical structures.
First of all I said you see all this what we call gray matter deep inside the spinal
cord.
This gray matter is where one neuron speaks to the next neuron, this is where information
is integrated and starts to make sense.
Now on the outside we've got what we call white matter and they are simply pathways
or tracks.
They're the highways in which electrical signals or neurons take.
Now if they're going up to the brain it's going to be sensory information.
If they're going down and away from the brain it's going to be motor information.
Now in the previous video I spoke to you about sensory information, that's this side.
All the information going up to the brain, different types.
Now I want to talk to you about motor information coming down from the brain.
Now first thing I want you to see is that you've got pyramidal or extra pyramidal signals
coming from the brain.
What's the difference?
Now pyramidal is this direct signal to specific muscles or muscle groups and it's going to
be for predominantly conscious movement.
If we look at extra pyramidal they're going to be indirect pathways and they're more
so for unconscious movement.
They also finely tune conscious movement.
Now if we look at the pyramidal system these are going to be information coming from the
brain for conscious movement and they're both called the corticospinal tracts, again
they're just the highways.
Corticose refer to the cortex so that means it's coming from the motor cortex.
If any signal is going to the cortex or coming from the cortex you're going to be consciously
aware of it.
So the lateral and ventral or anterior corticospinal tracts are for conscious motor movement.
Now the lateral corticospinal tract which you can see here, this is going to be coming
from the motor cortex which is in the pre-central gyrus of the frontal lobe.
I'm going to do a separate video on that so don't stress out.
If I want to move my right arm to draw or right, so fine motor movement predominantly
of my limbs, this is going to be the signal for the lateral corticospinal tract.
If I want to move my right arm it's going to come from my left motor cortex.
So it's coming from up here, it's going to descend down, it's going to cross to the
other side.
Crossing is called decassation and that happens at the medulla, that's the lowest part of
the brainstem, midbrain, pons, medulla, crosses over at the medulla, continues down via this
lateral corticospinal tract and then when it's at the level in which it needs to go to my
hand to tell it to move or right, it jumps down through this gray matter here, could
the ventral gray horn and jumps out and goes to my arm for riding.
So that again is fine motor control, that is the lateral corticospinal tract.
The ventral corticospinal tract is not for fine movement of the limbs but it's predominantly
for movement of the trunk and another difference here is that it's actually going to descend
down the brainstem and spinal cord down the same side of the brain in which it came down
from.
So it's going down, down, down, down, down, down, down, now remember ventral corticospinal
tracts here, it's going down the same side, now when it needs to innovate a part of my
trunk that needs to move, at the level in which it exits, that's where it's going to
cross over again to the ventral gray horn and come out and innovate the trunk to move.
Now another thing that you can see is that it's quite small and it also basically stops
at the mid thoracic area.
So if you kept doing these transverse sections down the spinal cord, you'd find that the
ventral or anterior corticospinal tract is gone by the time you descend down further
from the mid thoracic area.
Okay, what about these extra pyramidal tracts?
Firstly the rubro spinal tract which you can see here is very close to that lateral corticospinal
tract and they play a similar role.
Fine motor movement predominantly of the limbs.
Now we know that it's of the limbs because two reasons, one, as we cut down the spinal
cord, by the time we get to the cervical region, the rubro spinal tract basically disappears.
That's one indication that just controls the limbs.
Another indication is that if you ablate or put a lesion in this particular area of animals,
specifically primates, you find that they don't have fine motor control of the upper
limbs.
Decreased flexion and gripping seems to disappear so we think that we've evolved this rubro
spinal tract to be able to climb trees.
As we go to the reticulo spinal tract which you can see here and the vestibular spinal
tract, I'll group them together, they're there for posture, balance, coordinated movement.
So it plays an important role in coming from our vestibular system so this is going to
be inner ear, balance, head movement, head position and also posture and coordinated
movement.
Both of these together.
Then the tectospinal tract again is important for head movement and eye movement but also
as a reflexive response to visual or auditory cues.
So if you may hear something and your head reflexively moves towards it or you see something
in your eyes dart in that direction, that's going to be in part responsible due to the
tectospinal tract.
So this is a quick overview of motor or descending pathways coming from the brain going down
the spinal cord.
So, in this video, we're going to discuss the dorsal column medial lamniscus pathway,
which is a bit of a mouthful, but basically what it is, is the pathway in order for us
to be able to sense at our cortex, our sensory cortex, fine touch, two-point discrimination,
and also proprioception, and proprioception has to do with where you are in your own space,
okay?
So, this is a sensory pathway obviously, which means it's an ascending pathway, so it's
going up the spinal cord towards the brain.
Now, this may be a sensation that's coming from my toe, or my leg, or my hand, or my
joints, for example, and one really important piece of information that you need to be aware
of is that all ascending sensory pathways to the brain are a three-neuron chain.
That means there's only three neurons associated with, for example, if someone were to touch
my finger, in order for me to be aware of it in my somatosensory cortex, remember where
is the somatosensory cortex, you have that central gyrus, sorry, the central sulcus,
and behind the central sulcus is a bump called the post-central gyrus, that's the somatosensory
cortex.
So, if I need to understand or feel somebody touching my finger, it's a three-neuron chain
going from my finger into my spinal cord, up to my medulla, to my thalamus, to my cortex,
three neurons.
So, the very first thing I want to do is show you the most simplistic schematic of this
pathway and compare it to another ascending sensory pathway, which is the pain pathway.
So let's have a look.
So the first thing you need to draw up is the brain.
Now what type of section have I performed here, I've performed a coronal section also
known as a frontal section, so we've got the brain or the cerebrum, we've got the midbrain,
we have the pons, and we have the medulla, I'm not going to draw the cerebellum today
because we're not talking about it, and then the spinal cord going down.
Okay, so I want to tell you that if somebody again were to touch my finger, so fine touch,
remember this is the pathway we're talking about, fine touch.
So maybe it's the sensation of me holding a pen, for example.
How does this pathway get to my brain?
So very simply, you need to stimulate a sensory neuron, let's say in my finger, it will go
into the spinal cord, and on the same side of the spinal cord that it enters, it jumps
into the white matter, now remember you've got gray matter and white matter, gray matter
are where the bodies of the neurons sit, that's where the information comes into play, that's
where we make sense of information, it's interpreted, and the white matter, it's simply the highways.
So that's the axons.
So something that's stimulated my finger will go into my spinal cord, on the same side of
the spinal cord it will go up the white matter tracks, so it goes up.
Now it's going to go, remember you've got the midbrain, the pons and the medulla, when
it gets to the medulla, that's where it's going to synapse with the second neuron, remember
there's three neurons, that's the first neuron, it synapses with the second, and here at the
medulla, the second neuron will cross to the other side, this crossing is called decossation.
So the second order neuron is the neuron that decossates, then it's on the other side of
the body now, and it continues to ascend, now it's going to keep going up.
There's two structures I haven't drawn, they are the Thelmae, or the Thelmas, you're going
to have here and here, remember the Thelmas is the gateway to the cortex, so any sensory
information that's coming up, if you want to be aware of it, it has to go through the
cortex first, it's like the postal service, if you need to send a parcel somewhere, must
go to the postal service first so they can sort it, they can have a look and see where
it's supposed to go.
So this signal's coming up, it goes to the Thelmas, synapses with the third order neuron,
and then this third order neuron goes to where it finally needs to get to, which is the somatosensory
cortex at the post-sensual gyrus, and remember there's a topographical map of the body on
the somatosensory cortex, which tells you it's going to have, for example, over here
it's going to have the pharynx and larynx and then the head, and then it's going to
have the hand and then the arm and then the trunk, and then the knee and leg and genitals.
Now this is coming from the hand, so it should be going there, if I want to be a bit more
accurate, should be going around about here.
And this is the three neuron chain for fine touch, two point discrimination, a proprioception.
Into the spinal cord, A sends up the same side of the spinal cord, synapses with the second
order neuron at the medulla, so let's label medulla.
It then A sends up on the opposing side of the body until it hits the Thelmas, let's
label the Thelmas, and then the Thelmas will sort it and send it to the somatosensory cortex.
Now that's a very simplistic view of how this pathway goes up.
Now I want to compare it to that of the pain pathway.
Now the pain pathway is also an ascending sensory pathway, but it actually travels to
the brain through a different set of tracks.
Let's have a look.
Again, let's say that I prick my finger, so before I touched it, now I'm pricking the
exact same part of my finger, so let's use the pain pathway in red.
Now this green pathway, I'm just going to write up, remember it's called the dorsal
column medial lamniscus pathway, I'll tell you about what all those terms mean shortly,
but let's write d, c, dorsal column, m, medial lamniscus pathway to represent that.
Now let's look at the pain pathway.
So I prick my finger and the signal will go into the spinal cord.
Now here's one of the differences.
As soon as the pain neuron gets into the spinal cord, that's where it synapses with its second
order neuron.
More importantly, it's also where it decasates or crosses over to the other side of the body.
And then it begins to ascend.
So it goes up all the way up the spinal cord, it bypasses the brainstem, so it bypasses the
medulla, the pons, and the midbrain, and then goes to the thalamus.
Remember, every sensory input that we need to be aware of, we need to be aware of pain,
has to go to the thalamus first.
And then it synapses with its third order neuron and then it goes to where it needs to get
to.
Now the reason why I'm showing you this, again this is the pain pathway.
Now it's not just pain, it's actually the pain and temperature pathway.
And of course it's not called the pain and temperature pathway, just like this green
one isn't called the fine touch or proprioceptive or two point discrimination pathway, it's
got a complex name.
The complex name for pain and temperature is spinal phalamic, and that's simply because
it goes from the spine to the thalamus.
Easy.
All right.
Why am I showing you this?
It's really important for a couple of reasons.
One is what's the most apparent thing that you can see that's different between the two?
Well, you can see that touch goes up one side of the spinal cord, actually the same side
that enters, that's called ipsilateral, if it goes, if it's the same side, pain goes
up the contralateral, this is the opposing side of the spinal cord.
This is important because if an individual gets some sort of injury or maybe a lesion,
so some sort of damage, to one side of the spinal cord, let's just say here, what does
that mean in regards to what type of sensations they can or cannot feel?
We'll have a look.
An individual who has a lesion, for example, let's just say this is the left side and this
is the right side.
An individual who has a lesion on the left hand side of the spinal cord, they will not
feel pain or temperature on the contralateral side below the level of injury.
You can see that because it's stopping the pain pathway from going up, but they will
be able to feel touch on the contralateral side below the injury.
Now remember, all these signals aren't just coming in from one side, they're coming in
from this side as well, which means you feel to very simply draw it up again.
Coming in this side, here's touch, goes up that same side, which it did over there.
Synapses at the medulla, crosses over, goes to the other thalamus, and then goes to the
cortex, and then pain, pain's going to come in, synapse, then cross, then go up to the
thalamus, synapse, and go over there.
So again, here's that lesion on one side.
And what I said before was that a lesion on one side of a spinal cord may mean that the
individual will not feel pain on the contralateral side below the level of injury, but they will
feel fine touch on the contralateral side below the injury, but they will not feel fine touch
on the ipsilateral, the same side below the level of injury, but they will feel pain and
temperature on the ipsilateral side below the level of injury.
Now obviously, that takes a bit of time to sort of work through your head, but hopefully
it makes sense.
This is one of the reasons why if somebody's in a car crash to test a spinal injury, they'll
sometimes touch the patient or rub down their legs, so touch them, that's fine touch, or
they'll get an ice cube, for example, or an ice pack, and rub it down the leg and ask
them if they feel that, because they're feeling two different pathways, two different pathways
coming up, and it helps to distinguish whether there's an injury on one side of the body
or an injury on the other side of the body.
Alright, that's the first thing I wanted to talk about.
This week in the clinic. I got to see Pat Rainey. It was great to see him again
I fused his back about 10 years ago
He was doing great until a week before a visit in the clinic and something went seriously wrong
Pat had some knee trouble. He laid off his usual five mile a day exercise walk and when his knee got better
He went out and did the walk and sure enough a day later bam
extreme back pain and pain shooting down the leg if
If you've ever had sciatica pain down the leg due to an inflamed or compressed herniated disc
I just want to say I am sorry. It is wicked painful. It's more pain than a lot of people have ever experienced
It's kind of childbirth like pain
If you've had that kind of pain then one thing one light bulb went off in your mind
You had one question and that is what happens now
That's the purpose of this video. We're going to answer that question
And if you've had sciatica or if you're having it now, we're going to tell you what you need to do
What's the best treatment for a herniated disc it depends on some things, but it's either going to be oral
anti-inflammatory medications an
Epidural steroid injection or microdyskectomy surgery or some combination of all of those
Well, this is it. We're going to bring everything together and describe
How a herniated disc has occurred you've had a tear in the annulus the nucleus pulposus is sticking out
There's compression of a nerve root. You had a back ache that then progressed into sciatica. Okay, great doc
What do you do?
Well, the first thing you do is ask yourself. Are there any red flags?
Is there any numbness or weakness that if it were to become permanent would impact the way that you function?
Yeah, maybe I got a little bit of weakness in my ankle
But even if I was that way forever, I would hardly notice it. That's not functionally limiting weakness
Yeah, my foot's a little numb
But I mean I didn't even notice until my wife scratched it that is not functional limiting weak numbness
Functionally limiting means if you had that permanently it would affect the way that you function
So if you've got significant functionally limiting numbness or weakness
uncontrollable pain or any red flags history of cancer
vomiting
Blood passage of blood in the stool any of those shakes or chills if none of that is happening
Then you're okay to do three things
rest
Get moist heat get in the shower and let the hot water run on your back and take anti-inflammatory
Medications usually either a leave or ibuprofen along with prilosec to control the acid in your stomach
Alright, we're three weeks into it and that's not working pain still there
It's time to get an MRI scan of your back if you have pain shooting down your leg
it's probably a herniated disc and
If it is a herniated disc and the pain is severe you're a good candidate for an epidural injection, but
You can't get an epidural injection until you've had an MRI that shows it confirms that it is a herniated disc
So most people would see their primary care doctor
When it first happens the primary care doctor will get an x-ray to make sure it's not an infection cancer or from trauma
So suit and the x-rays almost always net normal
X-rays don't show herniated discs, right? So the x-rays normal three weeks goes by pain still there see the doctor again
You need an MRI you get the MRI the MRI shows a herniated disc
Now you're a good candidate to see a pain management doctor to do an epidural injection
What's an epidural injection? You know most people think when you when I say epidural injection, what do you think of?
Pregnancy right childbirth
Epidural is a pain control injection that can control pain no matter what it's from
But in the case of a herniated disc
It's even better because the herniated disc is actually in the epidural space
So the good news is epidural injection can usually control the pain of a herniated disc
The bad news is it wears off
So the medication the steroid in an epidural steroid injection average lasts about a hundred hours
So you get your epidural injection in a hundred hours later if that disc is still there the whole cycle is just going to start again
And that may be the case
But first of all you get a hundred hours of relief and second of all you may succeed in just
tampering it down and then it's your body's healing and it just doesn't come back all the way up if
the epidural injection wears off and
Remember you're going to get better on your own in 12 weeks
Eighty-four percent in six weeks. So what if you had an epidural injection every two weeks, right?
So that's where the three epidural injections comes from get an epidural injection if it worked great
But it wore off you get another one if it worked great
But it wore off you get another one if it worked great, but it wore off and you're still having pain
so you have uncontrollable pain after
12 weeks or
Functionally limiting numbness or weakness then you're a good candidate for surgery
Look nobody wants back surgery
Unless this pain is zinging down your leg and just absolutely killing you and then you'll be begging for something called micro
dyskectomy
Micro dyskectomy is a half-inch incision in your back the neurosurgeon or fellowship trained orthopedic surgeon spine surgeon
Goes in and look looking under a microscope
Drills off shaves off a little bone and takes out the herniated disc fragment
Not the whole disc, right? You need that disc to be a shock absorber and all the rest
Just the part that has come through the rent just the nucleus pulposus that is sticking out
That's what they're going to remove that operation is called micro dyskectomy
Does it work? Yeah, it really does in studies
randomized controlled trials of micro dyskectomy
Versus no surgery. This is the interesting part if you look two years after the herniated disc the groups are exactly the same
Which is what you would predict remembers video one of this series. Does a herniated disc get better on its own?
Yeah, that's what normally happens. So two years out. Everybody's the same
But the people who had surgery got better the day of surgery
The people who didn't have surgery slowly improved as their body
Digested and absorbed the herniated disc. Well, I hope this I hope this explains to you what your options are in
Pat Ranny's case. He had a giant disc herniation. He had functional weakness on
Examination and the MRI confirmed that the disc herniation was so large
It was going to be hard for him to get better on his own
So instead of recommending epidural injection, which would have been an option for him
He chose to go forward with micro dyskectomy surgery. There's some other complications with him
We'll come back and show you the rest of Pat's story as it evolves. I
Hope these videos on herniated disc were helpful to you. It's a very common problem. It can be serious
It usually gets better by itself
But there's some stuff you got to know to make sure you're in the right group and taking care of yourself the right way
All of that information is in this series
Stay tuned to the clinic to get all of the information you need to take proper care of your body as you age
And find out what happened to Pat on future episodes
Did you see her spine decompress?
Hey guys, today we're gonna be talking
about spinal traction hanging from a pull-up bar.
Is this right for your back
in helping you fix low back pain?
No doubt for some people,
traction treatment can help relieve back pain.
But for others, it can be the exact opposite
of what we want to do.
Like for Stephanie, you can drop on down.
How does your back feel with that?
It hurts.
It hurts more.
So today guys, we're gonna tackle the truth
about what spinal decompression
and traction treatment actually does.
If it's right for you,
and if it's not, what you should do instead.
Get up and get down, get up and get down.
So traction treatment has been hailed
as a game changer for fixing low back pain.
Sometimes providing immediate relief for some
in helping people with chronic low back pain
relieve their symptoms for good.
But is it right for everyone?
Well, let's first start by just understanding
what does traction treatment or decompression,
what does it actually do to the spine?
Well, what it does is create a traction pull.
So if it's pulling up here and down here,
we're pulling the spine apart slightly.
Now what that does is actually help the disc
suck in some fluid content
and it can help elongate your spine
just slightly a few centimeters sometimes.
Now here's the deal.
This only occurs and lasts for a little bit of time.
So when you jump off that pull up bar,
you may actually be a slight bit taller,
but it's probably only going to last a few minutes.
You start walking around again.
The spine's gonna go back to its normal height.
Now, who is this correct for?
Well, for some people, usually my older athletes,
maybe my 60, 70 year old patients,
or people who lift weights
and maybe can't get through a very long workout
without their back tightening up a lot,
this may actually help provide a little bit of relief
to their backs.
People that maybe can only walk for so many minutes
without their back hurting.
Traction treatment may be helpful for them,
but it's not right for everyone.
Let me show you someone it's not right for.
So Stephanie, I'm gonna have you
jump on this bed right here.
This is a test that I perform on my patients
called a prone instability test.
I'm gonna have her lay over the edge of the bed
and she's going to relax her back muscles
as much as possible.
Legs are just hanging over the bed like this.
Now, from right here, I apply a shear load
to different parts of her spine.
So I start down low,
we apply a little bit of a shearing load,
then we go up to the next one,
just pushing on the different segments
and eventually, yep, right there.
We found one.
If you saw, she almost jumped off the bed.
So at that particular segment,
I pushed down and it created a little bit of shear load
and that hurt pretty good, correct?
Now, all I'm going to do,
let's find that spot one more time,
about right there, okay?
I'm gonna have you pick your legs off the bed.
Okay, now right here, I'm going to push down again.
How's that feel?
No pain.
No pain.
Stephanie has what's called an instability.
So if you look at this disc designs model right here,
this particular segment has a little bit more motion
than the other ones.
That's called an instability.
And whenever you have those micro movements
that trigger your pain,
that shows that hanging from a pull-up bar
and decompressing your spine,
actually is creating more motion
at that part of your spine in triggering symptoms.
So for you, doing decompression hangs
would actually be the worst thing for your back.
So what do we do in that case?
Your spine needs stability.
Now, a lot of times people will want to do
decompression hangs or spinal traction treatments
because their back feels stiff.
So here's two things that I want you to do instead of hanging.
The first one is called a cat camel.
Now what we're gonna do right here is pull up this way.
So you're gonna arch your back here
and then go down nice and slow.
And what we're doing is we're moving the spine
through a range of motion into flexion
and into extension, nice and slow,
going about three seconds through each cycle.
And something like this,
we're not pushing hard into entry.
So this is not a stretch.
This is a light mobility movement for the spine.
And technically this is also giving us
a little bit of nerve glide.
So for some people that have nerve-like symptoms,
this can be helpful.
But all I want to do with this is six to eight cycles,
no more than that.
And for a lot of people that have a lot of back stiffness,
this can be helpful at alleviating some of those symptoms.
And especially if you have instability,
like I showed right here, this would be a better option.
After doing some cat camels,
for someone who has instability,
obviously rather than doing traction,
we wanna work on spine stiffness and stability.
So how do we work on that?
We learn how to properly brace
while we do things throughout the day.
So what I would have her do is just put her fingers
into her stomach and she is going to breathe and brace
in a way that pushes her hands laterally.
So from right here, very good, push them to the side.
Let's do that one more time.
So relax, so I can push the hands in
and then engage your abs, pushes the hands out to the side.
Now that bracing technique she is going to then do
whenever she performs any type of hinging motion.
So whether she's coming over to pick up a weight
off the ground, so let's come over and just demonstrate that.
Before she starts, she's going to brace
and then move about her hips to pick up the weight.
Things like that will add up over time
because she's able to keep her spine
in a more stable position rather than how most people
would just lack it, basically bend over and come back,
moving their spine under load.
That's often what's creating these symptoms
culminating over time.
So the more you can keep your spine stable
and move about your hips for someone with spine instability,
the more you can wind down symptoms
and have more pain-free days.
So there we go.
So the big thing guys is to understand
that there is no one size fits all
when it comes to fixing back pain.
There is no shortage of videos circulating
around social media today of people that are hanging
and finding some relief for their back pain
or saying that it's the best way
to find relief for their back pain.
If you're someone who hangs from a pull-up bar
and gets more pain after, or you're likely someone
that is rolling over in bed and having some back pain
or bending over and feeling a quick shot of pain,
you're the person that likely has more
of an unstable spine and you would benefit
from instead of hanging from a pull-up bar
doing a cat camel drill and doing some spine stability drills
and just making sure that you're moving about your hips.
So I hope you guys liked today's quick video
on whether or not you should be using spinal traction
decompression to fix your back pain
and hopefully we'll be on the right track
for fixing your pain and getting back
to doing everything you want to do.
Until next time guys, happy squatting.
They say that energy flows where attention goes
so I pay no mind, I waste my time
with all these negative cats scratching
so caught up in their egos, these people of love.
Most slip discs or herniated discs get better without surgery.
In fact, many herniated discs do not even cause pain.
I know not what you're told by others, but it is the truth.
Many research studies show herniated discs are found in many people who have no pain
associated with the finding.
But if you do have a herniated or slipped disc pain, know that most disc-related pains
go away over time.
Hi, I'm Dr. John Shim, and I'd like to explain how your own body combats pain related to
herniated discs.
If we review how herniated discs happen, the most simple way is to use the jelly donut
model.
The center of the human disc, which is the nucleus proposes, ruptures through the annulus
fibrosis, which is the woven structure containing the nucleus.
The nucleus, which has chemicals as well as a mass, irritates the surrounding tissues,
including the nerves.
This is like the jelly coming out of the side of the donut.
To be more specific, the outer structure, the annulus fibrosis, is made up of cross-linked
woven fibers that crisscross and are tied to each other, thus holding the center jelly
or nucleus proposes.
The cross-links of the fibers may break, allowing a separation of the fibers, and the nucleus
can then push through that break.
Once that weak spot allows an opening, the fibers themselves can also break, causing
a blowout of the nucleus.
The nucleus material then causes an inflammation of the tissues and the nerves, and the mechanical
pressure of the jelly-like substance also compresses the nerves and the tissues.
This causes the pain signals, numbness, and weakness.
Ouch!
So, how does the body fight off the pain associated with the disc herniation?
The human body removes any foreign object by activating special cells called macrophages
and monocytes that attack and destroy the foreign material.
To use another analogy, these cells are like small pac-men that chomp away at all that
stuff.
Through the body, a herniated disc, which is the nucleus proposes in the wrong location,
is considered a foreign object.
The macrophages and monocytes pack man away the nucleus.
In addition, the larger disc herniations tend to have the most water content.
With time, this disc piece will dehydrate.
Over time, the disc herniation is removed and shrinks back so it no longer irritates
the nerves or the tissues.
The body also heals back the tear in the annulus and reties the annular fibers.
That healed annulus is now associated with a scar, and though it helps hold the nucleus
back into its position, it is a weaker area and has a small but increased chance of re-rupture.
The disc will continue with the natural dehydration process and will bulge over time.
That's why if you get serial MRI studies of large disc herniations, you'll see spontaneous
regression of the herniation and longer term the findings of a disc bulge.
The most important thing you need to know is that the body does have its own way to
remove disc herniations.
If you're patient enough and do not have major nerve issues that require surgery, most
of the time the body does remove the disc herniation on its own.
That is the reason why many people will have disc herniations or bulges on MRIs but no pain.
If you are in severe pain, please discuss this condition with your doctor to make sure
you do not have a situation that requires urgent or emergent care.
Fortunately these situations are rare.
On the other hand, if you have truly lost muscle strength and lost the ability to control
your bladder or bowels, you may need care right now.
If your doctor determines that's not the case, and if you can tolerate the current pain, allow
your body to start the process of removing the disc herniation.
Let your body pack man away that disc.
If you're in pain but do not have significant loss of body functions, you can wait to see
if your body will remove or improve that disc herniation.
That's why greater than 90% of people with disc herniation do get better after 6-8 weeks
no surgery needed.
The take home message is, if you can tolerate the pain and be patient, you can avoid disc
surgery.
This is Dr. John Shim discussing how your body removes the disc herniation.
If you'd like more information about similar topics, please subscribe to our newsletter
or our YouTube channel.
Thank you.
If you have low back pain, you're not alone.
Most people in their lifetime experience one or more episodes of low back pain.
In most cases, the pain goes away within days to weeks.
However, it can last for three months or more.
These extended episodes are defined as chronic low back pain.
The common treatment approaches for low back pain include exercises, relaxation techniques,
and medications.
To understand how these treatments work, let's first look at the structure of your
lower back.
The spinal column is made up of 24 vertebrae.
Back problems and back pain commonly occur in the lumbar region.
Each vertebra has an opening that forms the spinal canal and protects the spinal nerves.
Facet joints and intervertebral discs connect the vertebrae above and below.
These structures are held together by groups of ligaments and muscles.
Muscles attached to the spinal column allow us to move, and they also support the spine
bearing the body's weight.
If some of these muscles are tight, weak, or imbalanced, pressure can result in excessive
wear and tear of other structures.
For example, a common problem in the lower back is disc herniation.
In this case, pressure on an intervertebral disc has caused its center, the nucleus pulposus,
to protrude backwards and push against the spinal nerves, resulting in low back pain.
For some patients, the pain can also be felt in nearby areas where the spinal nerves from
the lower back also extend, such as the leg and foot on the affected side.
Exercise can relax muscles and reduce pressure in the lower back structures.
It is important to consult your health team to determine which exercises are best for
your condition.
Consider one common low back pain exercise program called the McKenzie method.
For patients with posterior disc herniation, lying in a prone position reduces the pressure
on the disc.
If the pain condition allows, performing extension movements can gently stretch and
relax tight muscles.
Your lower spine also becomes more arched with time, bringing the disc center forward
into the correct position and reducing the irritation on your nerves, therefore decreasing
the pain in your lower back and legs.
The benefit of exercising is more than just reducing the pressure on your lower back structures.
By integrating back exercise into your daily routine, you can condition your abdominal
and back muscles, referred to as core muscles, and therefore prevent low back pain from
happening again.
For some patients, relaxation techniques, such as meditating in a relaxed position,
as well as cognitive behavioral therapy, can ease back pain.
This is because our brain not only perceives pain, but also regulates pain signals.
When back structures are damaged, pain signals ascend from the lower back through the spinal
cord, the rive in the brain region that perceives pain, the sensory cortex.
However, this is not a direct route.
At least two connections have to be made.
It's at these relay stations, which include the spinal cord and the thalamus, that pain
signals can be regulated by the brain.
Let's take a closer look at the first relay station, located in the dorsal horn of the
lumbar spinal cord.
Here, the incoming pain signals are passed from a sensory neuron in the lower back to
a relay neuron in the spinal cord.
The pain signals then ascend up to the brain.
This pain impulse can be reduced by a specific type of neuron carrying signals back from
the brain.
As a result, fewer pain signals are sent to the brain, so we feel less pain.
However, if for instance you are stressed, these brain signals can increase the pain
signals.
Therefore, studies show that patients with depression or anxiety experience more pain.
While patients who have positive attitudes and are engaged in their treatment feel less
pain.
Your health professional may also suggest that you take pain-relieving medications
that fit with your existing medication regimen.
The effects vary greatly, depending on what type of medication is prescribed.
Some medications help relax muscles, and some act on the neurons in the relay stations
to reduce the pain signals.
It is important to follow the advice of your health team and do exercises, learn relaxation
techniques, and perhaps take medications.
The benefits might not be felt right away.
It takes time and your active participation.
By taking an active and informed role in your own health, you are guaranteed to better
control your pain and lead a healthier life.
you
And we continue now with Dr. Alemiah Salaf.
Dr. Alemiah is a neuro radiologist and head
of medical imaging department at Ebencina Hospital.
She's a graduate of faculty of medicine,
Quate University.
She's a fellow of the Royal College of Radiology Ireland.
She has a cardiac CT fellowship from Harbor UCLA
in the States.
And she's a neuro radiology fellowship from Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, the States.
She's going to talk to us on interpreting MRI of the spine
as simple as ABCD.
Dr. Alemiah, the floor is yours.
Is there a mic?
Dr. Alemiah, thank you for the kind introduction.
Dr. Justin, thank you for inviting me to give this talk.
And congratulations for the organizing committee
on a wonderful conference.
Hopefully next time when we meet, it will be an in-person.
Is there, is the sound okay?
Yeah. Okay.
So I was asked to give a talk about interpreting MRI of the spine.
And it's not an easy task to try to compress a big topic
in 20 or 25 minutes.
But I will try my best and I will show you the approach
that I was taught how to simplify interpreting it
and make it as simple as ABCD.
But before we start, there are many imaging modalities
for the spine.
You have plane films.
You have seaky scans.
You have MRIs.
And I want to talk to you about a tool that we have.
If you go into the website of the American College of Radiology,
they have what is called the appropriateness criteria.
It's a very nice tool when you are in doubt of what imaging modality
to ask for your patient or whether to give contrast or not.
Then you can have, you can search the appropriateness criteria
by the presenting symptom or by the complaint of the patient.
For example, headache or myelopathy.
And it will give you what is the most appropriate imaging modality
according to the clinical scenario.
So they have multiple clinical scenarios and explanations
and evidence based on what is the most appropriate imaging modality.
So not a lot of people are aware of this tool,
but I urge you to take advantage of it.
It's a really evidence based tool that you have.
So let's move on to interpreting the MRI of the spine.
In a way that I was taught and I always teach it to our residents,
is that we start with the ABCDs.
When faced with an MRI of the spine,
the patient stays for a long time in the scanner
and multiple sequences are produced and multiple images are produced.
And if you're not used to looking at MRIs of the spine,
then you might be overwhelmed by it.
So I take the ABCD approach, A, standing for alignment of the spine.
Next, I look at the B, which is the bone or the bone marrow more precisely.
Next, I look at the C, which is the cord or the canal,
the spinal cord or the canal.
And finally, I look at the discs and degenerative changes.
And this approach helps you to have an overview of the whole spine
without missing any important findings or important structures.
So let's go into these in a little bit more detail.
So when assessing the alignment of the spine, we evaluate usually the...
Let's see if I can get a marker.
I think this is a marker.
Laser pointer.
Okay. So when assessing the alignment, we look at the spinal lines
and make sure that they are parallel.
So the first line is the interior spinal line
on the interior aspect of the vertebra.
The second line is the posterior spinal line on the posterior aspect
of the vertebra, and then the spinal laminar line
on the posterior aspect of the spinal canal.
So in between, the posterior spinal line and the spinal laminar line
lies the vertebral canal with the spinal cord.
The alignment is different actually from the spinal curvature.
The spinal curvature is how the way the spine curves and a normal curve is having lordotic
curvature in the cervical and lumbar region and a kyphotic curvature in the dorsal region,
or the thoracic region. And more and more we're seeing abnormalities in spinal curvature
because of our misuse of electronics, our iPhones, of the computers and tablets. And so we have what
is called text neck. And we see more in more and more in younger populations and pediatric
population. And unfortunately, abnormal curvatures and abnormal alignments lead to
accelerated degenerative changes in these populations. One abnormality of alignment also
is spondylolisthesis in which you have slippage of one vertebra over the other. It has, so if you
look at this MRI, you follow the anterior spinal line and you see that there is slippage of the L5
over S1. So this is one abnormality that you might see in relation to alignment of the spine.
So let's move along to our B, which is the bone or more precisely the bone marrow because this is
what we see on MRIs, the bone marrow. And we know that in an adult, the bone marrow is actually
a combination of red and yellow marrow. And because the yellow marrow is fatty mostly, so you see a brighter
signal. And there are many abnormalities. So a normal signal is a brighter signal of the bone
marrow. There are many abnormalities that you might face in a bone marrow. You might have bone
marrow lesions. One of the more common benign bone marrow lesions are oseous human geomas. On CT,
they are fairly diagnostic. But on MRI, they're not usually, they are diagnostic. But sometimes,
if they're not fatty, then they might be confused with more sinister abnormalities. So they have a
brighter signal with some punctate or striated appearance. And so this is one of the more common
abnormalities you see. And you might see them reported frequently. Another bone marrow abnormality
are the end plate changes. So the end plate is basically the interface between the disc and
the vertebra. And you might have abnormalities in the end plates because of degeneration or because
of infections, spondylo discitis, for example. Something that is more challenging to diagnose
is actually diffuse bone marrow infiltration. So as we said, because you have a combination of red
and fatty marrow, the yellow marrow, usually the bone marrow signal is brighter. But if you have a
process, a pathology that results in diffuse marrow infiltration, like some hematological conditions
or metastases, then you might end up with a dark signal in the bone marrow as this case. And sometimes,
it's really challenging to diagnose if you're not aware of the subtle bone marrow signal changes
in the brightness, for example. So compare this, for example, to this, the middle picture here,
you see that there is very dark bone marrow signal. And I hope that you recognize that there is a
spondylolisthesis in the very first MRI here. So we have an A abnormality and a B abnormality.
So let's move along to our C, which is the spinal canal or the spinal cord. And I'm going to spend
the second part of my talk about the spinal cord abnormalities. So I'm not going to
elaborate here more, just know that there are abnormalities that affect the spinal cord in
the form of myelopathy or lesions, or even abnormalities that are within the canal, but
outside the core, what we call extramedulary intradural abnormalities.
So let's move along to our D, which is disc and degenerative change. I find that spinal surgeons,
usually are more interested in the Ds. Neurologists are more interested in the Cs.
But if you follow the ABCDs, then you are sure to have an overview of the whole spine and not to
miss any important findings. And so extrinsic compression is the most common cause of myelopathy.
And as you see here in this case, there is a disc protrusion that is resulting in spinal cord
compression. And the normal disc signal intensity, sorry, is usually, in a young adult, is usually
bright because of the gelatinous center or the nucleus bulbosis. As we grow older, the disc center
starts to dehydrate. So it loses its water signal and becomes more dark. And this makes it prone to
injuries to protrusions, herniations. And in addition, you get the abnormalities in bone
degeneration. So a combination of disc abnormalities and osteophytes result in canal stenosis and can
lead to what we call compressive myelopathy. So you have an abnormal signal here in the spinal cord.
As a result of the compressive myelopathy. So basically, we went through a quick overview
of how to look at the spinal MRI, starting with to review the alignment, look at the alignment,
evaluate the parallel lines, make sure that there is no spondylolisthesis or slippage of one vertebra,
look at the curvature of the spine. B, the bone marrow, make sure that the bone marrow signal
is normal. There are no oseous lesions. C, the canal or the cord, look at the cord, make sure
that there is no signal abnormalities or lesions. And finally, the D stands for disc and degenerative
change. Make sure that there is no major disc abnormalities or osteophytosis.
Now, the second part of my talk, I'm going to spend a little time about the spinal cord
and the canal. Being neurologist, I'm sure that you guys are more interested in imaging of the
spinal cord. And we saw very wonderful talks by Dr. Tarkov Fahad about imaging of my approach to
myelopathy, sorry. And we saw another talk about animoso. So basically, my talk will be this part
of the talk, will be complementary to their talk. And myelopathy is a collective term that refers
to any pathological condition or a neurological deficit related to the spinal cord. It can be,
most of the time, it's secondary to a pre-existing condition. And if you're not able to diagnose
a secondary condition, then it's termed a primary myelopathy. Or the more commoner term to it is
transverse myelitis. We saw as Dr. Tarkov explained that the term transverse myelitis is basically
like a wastebasket term that everyone tends to diagnose if they fail to reach a diagnosis. But
if you really try your best with the new criteria and the new investigations that we have, then I
think you can actually reach a diagnosis in those cases. And again, as our colleague explained that
you can have acute myelopathies, subacute, or even chronic myelopathies. And there is a vast
differential diagnosis for myelopathies, multiple categories. The ones with the red star represent
the more commoner ones that we face. These include the category of demyelination, MS, NMO,
ADEM, and transverse myelitis. And one might argue that these are actually inflammatory as well.
Two more categories include most commonly astrocytomas, but also appendemomas, hemangioblastomas,
and metastases. In the vascular category, we have ischemia because of acute spinal infarction,
spinal artery infarction, and we have vascular malformations. In the inflammatory category,
we can see connective tissue diseases, sarcoidosis. In the infection category, there are multiple
organisms that are associated with infections, but honestly, we don't commonly see
direct infections of the spinal cord. We see them more as either post-infectious autoimmune
myelopathies or as a result of direct spread of infection from a local infection, for example,
post-surgical infection with direct spread into the spinal cord or spinal canal. And the last
category is toxic or metabolic, which includes examples like B12 deficiency, nitrous oxide,
and radiation. So we commonly see radiation actually involvement of the cord after those
who received spine radiation for metastases or for primary spine lesions.
So my approach to myelopathy is basically, first of all, when dealing with a case,
the first thing that we have to consider is that is there a surgical emergency?
So the first thing we allow by imaging is compression. Next, if you see an abnormal
segment, then you try to decide, first of all, is it a short segment or is it a long segment
of involvement? A long segment is basically something like three vertebral levels or above.
A short segment is something that is less than three vertebral levels. The third thing that we
look at is the appearance on a cross-section or an axial section. What does it look like?
Is there cord swelling or not? There are certain conditions that are associated with
cord swelling and then others that have signal abnormality without cord swelling.
Then we look at the contrast enhancement. Is there contrast enhancement or not? And finally,
we look at the brain. Is there brain involvement or not? And if there is, what does it look like?
So as we said, when it comes to the length of the spinal cord involvement,
for example, multiple sclerosis is known to have short segments of spinal cord involvement, whereas
conditions like NMO and transverse myelitis are known to have longer segments of involvement,
three vertebras and above. This is kind of an informative slide. What does it look like on
axial sections? So there are certain pathologies that have a tendency to involve certain parts
of the spinal cord on cross-section. So the multiple sclerosis here has a propensity for
involvement of the dorsal and lateral spine. Some conditions like NMO and transverse myelitis
have a propensity to involve the central cord with expansion. Certain conditions like infarction,
if you have anterior spinal artery infarction, then it tends to involve the anterior part of
the spinal cord. B12 deficiency, of course, you know that involves the dorsal column, so it
tends to involve the posterior part of the column or the posterior part of the cord.
So looking at the axial section can give you a clue as to what pathologies we might consider.
Now I want to go into some of the most common examples and go into more detail as to what
finding that you expect. And we know that in, for example, starting with MS, it's one of the
more common myelopathies we deal with every day. And we know that spinal cord is usually involved
in about 80 to 90% of MS patients. And we saw earlier that lesions are usually wedge shapes
in the posterior and lateral aspect of the spinal cord. Eventually, on the long term,
just like the brain atrophy develops. And so this atrophy related to disability of the patient.
And contrast enhancement, again, just like the brain represents acute lesions and usually persists
for up to six weeks. So it's a sign of acuity. This is another example here. A stir sequence is
actually a sequence that has suppresses the fat. So it gives you a better appreciation of
the lesions in the spinal cord. So it's basically the same lesion on a T2 and a stir.
And you see that the lesion is a little bit more better appreciated on the stir.
And the patient has the classic appearance of MS lesions in the brain.
So let's move along. This is just to show you that initially in the disease, the cervical spine
is the most commonly involved in MS. And so that our protocol in MRI usually includes just the
cervical spine. If you think that the patient has symptoms related to the thoracic cord,
for example, then I think you should clearly state that so that it gets included in the protocol.
Because otherwise, just the cervical spine is the routine like that.
So let's move along. We saw a very beautiful talk by Dr. Hale about senuromyelitis optica.
I think he covered most of these points and he showed some cases. And just to recap, there's,
it's a long, longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis. More than three or more
vertebral levels, you have optic neuritis as well. There's central cord predominance.
And eventually the patient goes into atrophy. There is something called the bright spot
lesions within in NMO. So within the abnormality, you might see areas which are more bright,
which is a finding that has been associated with NMO.
The brain, of course, is involved in an neuromyelitis optica. Sometimes there are no lesions at all.
But the classic lesions, if there are any, usually involve the dorsal medulla and the
periventricular and periapendymal areas and the long corticospinal tracts.
So this is basically the posterior brainstem, periventricular region. And this is a
periventricular involvement as well.
ADEM is another example. And so it's usually, you guys are more proficient in the clinical
aspect of it. But as the name implies, it's an incafalo myelitis. So there's an element of myelitis
in ADEM. It's usually nonspecific and the findings, it's usually pointed out by the history itself.
Let's move along to another category, the vascular category. The vascular category includes vascular
malformations, either AV fistulas or arterial venous malformations. AV fistulas are usually
direct communications between the arteries and the vein. And so this results in an increased
pressure in the veins. The veins usually, if they are increased in pressure, there is vascular
engorgement. And this in turn affects the perincoma itself, whether in the brain or in the
spinal cord. So you start to see abnormality or signal abnormalities in the perincoma itself.
This is an example that we recently had, the patient presented with inability or difficulty
in walking. And she initially had a brain MRI that showed an abnormal signal in the
medulla oblongata. And there was a little bit of flow voids in the visualized part of the spinal
cord on the sagittal in the MRI brain. So we decided to do cervical spinus, a proper cervical
spine. And it shows all these punctate flow voids at the posterior aspect of the spinal cord.
And these are actually the vascular or venous congested veins behind the spinal cord.
Eventually, unfortunately, the unfollow of the patient has progressed. And you see there is an
extensive signal abnormality extending from the brainstem all the way to involve the cervical
cord. This is one example of vascular malformation. Another example is the classic AV malformation.
This is a younger patient who had a history of, I think she was 11 or 12 years old. She had history
of back pain. And then she kept coming to the emergency department and sent away until she
woke up one day with inability to walk. And so an urgent MRI showed that she has this vascular
lesion here. You see it's dark. As Dr. Harad said, it's the bad black. So it's a hemorrhagic lesion
with extensive myelopathy both on the cranial aspect of the lesion and also the caudal aspect.
We chose to do CT angiogram. And it showed the abnormal vessels here on the anterior and the
posterior aspect of the spine with an aneurysmal dilatation within the spinal cord itself.
And so this patient underwent conventional angiogram. It showed the classic appearance
of an AV malformation with the nitis. So there's a nitis of abnormal vessels.
And an abnormal draining pain. I think the patient underwent surgery, which was not curative. So the
treatment of AVMs is usually very challenging and it's a combination of surgery, radiation,
and interventional radiology. In her case, she underwent surgery as a first step, which cured
her myelopathy. Sorry, but however, it did not completely obliterate the vascular malformation.
So she still needs additional treatment. The third category is tumors. So there are tumors that
involve the spinal cord and they are divided into intramedulary tumors that involve the
perincoma of the cord itself. And as we said, the most common are astrocytomas and they produce
more of an abnormal signal, more homogenous signal. And then ependemomas usually produce more
heterogeneous signal because they have cystic changes and they have hemorrhages. So you tend to
see cysts. You tend to see black representing blood products and edema or myelopathy on either
side of the lesion. And this is a classic ependemoma appearance.
The second category of tumors that we encounter are extramedulary tumors. So
they are outside the spinal cord, but they're still intradural within the dura and within the
spinal canal. And this is an example of these. It's a neurofibrom actually. There are multiple
lesions here. You see them on the anterior aspect of the spinal cord. And if you look at
the cross-sectional imaging here, this is a post-contrast image. The tumor is almost occupying
the whole of the cross-section of the spinal canal. And you see the spinal cord is actually
compressed on the posterior aspect or the posterior lateral aspect of the tumor.
So this is the second category of tumors that we encounter.
And then an example of metabolic conditions that affect the spinal cord are B12 deficiencies.
Of course, it produces subacute combined degeneration of the cord. And you see here the
signal. This is a chronic case of the signal of the abnormalities almost liquefied or CSF-like
signal and produces the location is usually dorsal corresponding to the dorsal column.
So I always like to end with a case to demonstrate our approach. And I chose this case because
for me, this was a very educational case. We encountered it back in 2015 when I first joined
up in SINA. And he was a young patient, 42-year-old patient who had progressive lower limb weakness.
And he had an MRI which showed a signal abnormality. So myelopathy that is in the lower
cervical and thoracic region. On cross-section, if you look at it, the cord was diffusely involved
and there was swelling. If you compare, I put the normal part of the cord here for comparison.
You see that the cord is well-defined and normal signal. Whereas on cross-section, it is hyper-intense.
And if you look at the lower brainstem, you notice that there is an abnormality here on the sagittal.
So we did an MRI. And the MRI showed diffuse signal abnormality involving the posterior
aspect of the brainstem. So look at the axial here. You see it's periventricular and pericoductal
abnormality. The follow-up here shows that the lesion developed contrast enhancement,
which means that it is actually progressing. So if we apply our rules or our approach
and try to diagnose this case, according to the points that I mentioned earlier, so if there's
no compression, the length of this final cord was actually more than three vertebral levels.
On the axial section, it involved the whole cord with swelling. Initially, there was no
contrast enhancement. But on follow-up, it showed contrast enhancement, which means that the lesion
was getting more serious and more sinister. And there was brain involvement as well in the
posterior brainstem and the periventricular region. Our initial impression was something
of along the neuromyelitis-optica spectrum because of the radiological appearance and
because of the involvement of the posterior brainstem. It's the area post-trema, as Dr.
Sahed mentioned before. However, on follow-up, there were some red flags, again, as his talk
raised. So the first red flag was that the history that we thought was representing
optic neuritis was questionable. So there was questionable optic neuritis. His antibodies
were negative. Clinically, he was not improving. He was deteriorating and radiologically deteriorating
as well because we saw that he developed contrast enhancement despite treatment.
So the decision was to take a biopsy for that patient from one of the brain lesions and it
turned out to be a high-grade glioma. So very shocking for us. But the thing is that this
case was back in 2015. If you look at the latest available WHO brain tumor classification, which
came on 2016, they actually introduced a new brain tumor entity called diffuse midline glioma
that involves the brainstem and involves the spinal cord as well and has a certain mutation,
the actually K27M mutation. So as I said, this is a very educational case. What we thought that
might be a myelopathy because of demyelination or inflammatory turned out on follow-up to be
something else. So the message I want to give you is that always keep in mind the approach
to myelopathy and keep in mind the red flags that help you to change or alter the diagnosis.
I believe that was the end of my talk. We talked about the ABCD approach to MRI of the spine
and I talked about the approach to myelopathy. And just one point is that brain imaging is
useful in the diagnosis of pathologies of the spine. So if you have a myelopathy and I think
the patient deserves to have an initial or baseline brain imaging in that. And these are
my references. Thank you very much. Thank you for this excellent presentation.
Hello everybody and welcome back to another anatomy tutorial today
We're going to be looking at the anatomy of the cervical spine particularly looking at C spine x-rays
Now there are three main views that we take when looking at the cervical spine
We are going to start with our lateral view
Move on to our frontal view and then assess our open mouth view or our peg or a dongle view of the C spine
Now before we get on to looking at the anatomy on an x-ray
I first actually want to look at the CT scan so we can gain a greater appreciation for what the 3d morphology of the cervical vertebra are
They are quite different to the thoracic and lumbar vertebra
And it's difficult when we look at an x-ray and try and appreciate which bits of the vertebra are where because everything is superimposed
On top of one another so let's head over to a CT scan and then go to our x-rays
So here we have an axial bone windowed CT
We can head up into the skull base first
Now this is an image you should be familiar with if you've watched the skull base for ramina videos
You should be comfortable naming these various for ramina that are passing through and as we head down towards our occipital bone
We should find our occipital condyles that articulate with our atlas our C1
So here is the anterior body of our C1 the anterior arch and as we head down
Inferiorly a little bit more our posterior arch here of C1
Now C1 is called the atlas like the Greek god the atlas holding the globe up
And that's exactly what it does
It sits at the base of the skull and articulates with that occipital bone around the foramen magnum region there
And see our anterior arch here find our lateral bodies
We've got transverse for ramina that allow for our
Vertebral arteries to go up into the base of the brain and
We can see these transverse processes out the side the C1 transverse processes are actually quite large in comparison to some of the other
cervical vertebra and
Then we have this posterior arch with a posterior body here and sometimes a very small or rudimentary spinous process
You can see our anterior arch is surrounding this structure here
Which is our dense or our adontoid process of C2 sitting below it
You can see that our C1 or our atlas doesn't actually have a vertebral body
And this is kind of a remnant of that vertebral body here C2
Contributing this dense process allowing us for rotation and flexion and movement at that point here
There's a ligament that comes across here our transverse ligament that holds this dense in place
And we've got an articular surface here that allows for articulation between the anterior body of our C1 and our dense process
So let's move down
We're going to see the dense fan out into the body of C2 our axis sitting below our atlas
And we can see as we head further down C2 we get this posterior arch and this is our spinal canal
So we can see that C2 has a small vertebral body
Still got transverse foramina allowing for the vertebral arteries to flow up
Then it's got our lamina heading backwards to the spinous process also a very small spinous process on C2
Now C1 and C2 our atlas and our axis have quite different morphology to the rest of the vertebra
So let's pick a random vertebra here
We can see here that we have our vertebral body our transverse foramina
Allowing for those vertebral arteries to come up towards from the subclavian arteries all the way up to the brain before they fuse to form the basilar artery
Away from our vertebral bodies. We have what's known as the pedicle
The pedicle then heads out and in our cervical spine our transverse processes here
It's kind of a biffid transverse process
It's actually kind of anterior to our pedicles and you'll see that changes as we head down into the thoracic vertebra
Our lamina posteriorly fused to form our spinous process and one of the distinctive features of our cervical spine
Is that we have these biffid spinous processes, especially in the superior region of the cervical spine
We then have a mass of
Bone here that we call our paws interarticularis that actually is the region between our
Inferior and superior processes that allow for those facet joints to form we can see a facet joint here
So our pedicles our paws interarticularis and our lamina heading out towards our spinous process with our vertebral body at the front
And our transverse processes in our cervical spine quite anterior
So let's head all the way down into the thoracic spine so we can see some of those differences
Here we know this is a thoracic spine because now we've got ribs
Articulating with these transverse processes
You can see an anterior vertebral body and as we head further and further inferior in the spine that
Vertical body gets bigger and bigger. It needs to allow for more and more weight-bearing as we head further down
We've now got large well-defined pedicles that we didn't really see as well in our cervical spine
And you can see our transverse processes are now posterior to that pedicle there and then we have our lamina
Smaller more angulated lamina heading out towards our spine as process
Which is much larger as we head further down in the spine and it's not buffered here as you can see
So let's now go to our x-rays and identify these various structures on the three different views
So let's start by looking at our lateral x-ray and we can get probably the most information from our lateral
So it's a good place to start
The first thing I like to do when looking at the cervical spine on an x-ray is make sure we've got correct alignment
Mull alignment of the spine is a great indicator for something else happening. That's wrong if we see malalignment
We need to find the pathology
So before we can ascertain whether this cervical spine is indeed well aligned
We first need to check that we have the correct angle on our lateral here that the x-ray itself is not rotated
And the best way to do that when looking at a lateral cervical spine x-rays is to find the angle of the mandible here
We can see on this posterior surface of the mandible the left and right mandibles line up well
If we were rotated at all there'd be malalignment of those posterior surfaces
So we know that this patient is square on to our x-ray and we can check for lateral tilt of the head or neck
By looking at the inferior surface here
And we want to see that they're generally while aligns and here we can see the two inferior surfaces
There's not much difference between those we've caught it on the right angle and actually on a true lateral
There will be a slight difference due to the fanny out of those x-rays as we head towards the scanner
So now that we know the x-ray is well aligned. Let's see if the cervical spine itself is well aligned now the first line
That we look at is called the anterior
Vertible line now all of these lines that we look at we once a slight lordosis to these lines
We don't want them to be dead straight or any kyphosis in the cervical spine
So you can see here if we follow the anterior surfaces of those vertebral bodies
We have a nice smooth lordotic line
Then we can head posteriorly and we want to do the same here look at the posterior line along those vertebral bodies
We've got a nice smooth lordotic view here
This line represents the posterior longitudinal ligament and the anterior line is the anterior longitudinal ligament
The next line we look at is what's known as our spinal laminar line so we can see our spinous processes here
They're a little bit less dense than our laminar that head out
sharply from our paws into
Articularis heading towards that spinous process making the posterior arch of that spinal canal
So here is our spinal laminar line they're heading across again. It's smooth. It's lordotic
It's slightly more lordotic than our anterior and posterior lines and the last line
We look at is our posterior spinous line
We take the tips of these spinous processes and join them up and what we're looking for here is that there's a nice smooth line
It's quite lordotic normally when joining these spinous processes
And we don't want any major step off between one vertebra and the other and here
We don't really include our C1 spinous process if it does have a spinous process
We start from C2 and draw that line. So we've got our anterior vertebral line posterior vertebral line
Our spinal laminar line which also correlates to where our ligamentum flavor is and this is the posterior border of our spinal canal
So our spinal canal lies here between our posterior vertebral line and our spinal laminar line
And then we have our posterior spinal line
So now that we know it's well aligned. Let's have a look at some of the anatomy of the cervical spine
We'll start at C1 our atlas can see our anterior body here forming almost as oval shape with a flat
posterior surface
That articulates with the anterior surface of our dance if we follow the outline of the dance here
It protrudes into that C1 vertebra
The space between our anterior surface of the adontoid and our posterior
Articular surface of this anterior body of C1 should be less than 3 millimeters in adults and less than 5 millimeters in children
So that gap gets slightly smaller as we go through puberty
We can then look at our posterior body of our C1 atlas as well as the small spinous process here
Moving down to C2 we can see our vertebral body as well as our dance heading forward and then our laminar heading posterior towards our
spinous process
If you look at the shape of these vertebral bodies of our C3 to C6
You can see that superior end plate of the vertebral body is quite flat and our inferior surface has this curved appearance with this
Protrusion anteriorly and this is normal morphology for our cervical spine and that gets flatter and flatter as we head out towards
Out thoracic spine
The spaces between our vertebral bodies are where our intervertebral discs lie
We can't see the discs on an x-ray, but we can appreciate the space that they create
You can see on the superior corner of these vertebral bodies
We have more dense
Regions than the rest of the vertebral body and this is our pedicle heading out towards us as well as our transverse
Process coming out here now transverse process has that transverse foramina that allows
The vertebral arteries to head up through the cervical spine
Protected by those bones because it's a very vulnerable region on the body and then heading up through our foramen magnum eventually becoming our
basilar artery
Here we can see the joint facets. Let me just go and draw these
We can see the facet joint here
Between our two cervical vertebrae, this is between C2 and C4
Our C2 to C3
Facet joints a bit more difficult to see because of the angle of that facet joint
It's a bit more facing immediately than the rest
We can look at these facet joints and in between the facet joint this part of bone here
It's called our pars interarticularis
From there heading out towards our spinous process that region there is called our lamina and then there are spinous process
setting out so our pedicle
Giving rise to our transverse process
Then heading out towards our pars interarticularis our lamina and our spinous process
Now there are a couple of other things apart from the cervical bones if we can look at here
We've mentioned the mandible coming in here. If we head to the very top of our image
We're almost cutting it off here, but here is our cellar terseca
Now cellar terseca then heads down a bone known as our clivus and our clivus should then be pointing towards the tip of our
Dontoid process in front of that cellar terseca or our sphenoid sinuses that you would recall from our sphenoid sinus talk
And then we have some soft tissue that is
Anterior to our cervical spine here, and it's really important to note the thickness of these soft tissues
We can see our nasal cavity here
Then heading to our oral cavity which ends at the level of our hyoid bone
You can just see our hyoid bone there. So our nasal pharynx our oral pharynx below that is our laryngo pharynx
And then you can see the laryngeal cartilages here our larynx and our trachea heading off towards the medius dynum
So from C1 to C4, let's count it out one two three four
This region above here this soft tissue is known as our retro pharyngeal soft tissue
Below that is called our retro tracheal soft tissue now one of the questions that you can get asked
I can kind of catch you out is how many cervical vertebra there are and if you know this well
It might seem silly to you, but people get confused because we have eight cervical nerve roots
But only seven cervical vertebra
That's important to know that we should be able to see the whole of this seventh cervical vertebra in order to adequately
Assess the cervical spine on a lateral x-ray and hopefully we'll see a bit of T1 coming in as well
Now why are there seven cervical vertebra and eight cervical nerve roots?
Well, the first nerve root comes in above C1
So the nerve roots are named according to the vertebra that they come out above and then we will have C7 coming out above
C7 and then the space between C7 and T1 that nerve root is called C8
From the thoracic vertebra down our nerve roots that are associated with the corresponding vertical body then come up below the vertical body
That's another difference of the cervical spine as opposed to the thoracic and lumbar spines
Now it's quite difficult to appreciate on this view the pedicle coming out straight towards us because we foreshortening that pedicle
We got superimposition of this transverse process and this pause into articularis
It's quite difficult to appreciate and we know that the nerve roots come out between those pedicles
And if you want to see that space where the nerve root is coming out
What we can do is get an oblique view as you can see like this
We've taken a lateral view and tilted the patient slightly
You can see now our vertebral body here and our pedicle coming off of that vertebral body
Here are our facet joints
We move those facet joints out
Latterly like that and allowed for those pedicles to now come into our plane and here
We can see this pedicles make the superior and the inferior borders of this
Intervertebral for Raymond, which is where our nerve roots come out and it's important to note that our transverse processes are coming out
Anteriorly from these pedicles as we looked at on our CT scan
They lie quite anterior to those pedicles and above those we get what known as an unsonnet process a
Portion of bone that heads superiorly from that vertebral body that can then impinge on this space
And we can see our unsonnet process better on our frontal view
So let's have a look at our frontal view and while we're on the topic of the unsonnet process
You can see here this process heading up superiorly this there is our unsonnet process and
Growth of those processes can impinge on those nerve roots coming out between the pedicles now before we can review any of the anatomy
Let's make sure we've got the correct alignment
One of the easiest ways to know that you've got the correct alignment is to look at the trachea here
And see your spinous processes posteriorly and you want your trachea and your spinous processes to be aligned
Spineous process are really superior track is anterior any rotation. We're gonna get my alignment of those two
We can also look at the trachea and our proximal portions of our clavicles here
And make sure the distance between those and the trachea is generally quite straight
Our trachea can head off a little bit more to the right
So sometimes it's better to look at the spinous process itself between those clavicles
So let's have a look at some of the anatomy on the frontal view on this view
We can actually see our C2 body heading up towards our adontoid process or our dents and heading across like that
There's our lateral bodies of our atlas. I'll see one and then we'd be able to count the cervical vertebra down
We can see the bodies of our cervical vertebra here. These are the typical shape of those vertebral bodies
Our pedicles will be heading out
We can just see our transverse processes coming out like that
And that's what it makes these small bumps along the side of our cervical spine frontal x-ray
Sometimes we have a cervical rib coming out here and it can be very easy to call this vertebra here T1
Especially if we have that cervical rib
The best way to know that this is in fact C7 is C7 has these large transverse processes that angle downwards angle
Inferially and T1's transverse processes actually angles
Superially like that. So we get this angle here this diamond shape that is the joint between
C7 and T1 there we can see our first rib coming off of T1
Some other anatomy to note is to look at our spinous processes
You can see here as we head superiorly we have these bifid
spinous processes like that and then they become
Unified we get single spinous processes as we head down towards the thoracic vertebra
We can see our facet joints here
We're not going to be looking through the joint itself because those joints are lying at an angle to our frontal view
But we can appreciate those joints here and here and here and this region here
This region of bone is our paws interarticularis and what we get is an interarticular column being formed here as well
as our vertebral column being formed there
We can look at the trachea itself and as we head up towards the larynx that trachea narrows and we get our
pyrophore recesses here as well of our trachea as then we head up into the
Orovarings here is our trachea heading down this lucency can confuse you the bone is not lucent
It's the trachea overlying the bone these vertebral bodies are in fact normal
Let's move on to our last view and this is our peg view or our open mouth view
We first check that it's technically sound we can see our teeth
Line up with this occipital bone across there
Then we know we've got a good view into our C1 which is here
Which wraps around you can see these wrapping around the odontoid process
We wanted to see that the space between our dense or our odontoid process is the same on both sides between these lateral
bodies of our C1 and again
We want to see that the lateral bodies of C1 match up to the lateral bodies here of C2
You can see our C2 spinous process here is also biffered along that side and here is our C2
virtual body that extends upwards into our dense and
Really this open mouth view is to establish the relationship between our C1 and C2 and make sure that there's no fractures between any of those bones
So we've looked at our lateral view our frontal view as well as our open mouth view and the most important thing when assessing a
cervical spine x-ray is checking that you've got good alignment of the bones and then
Specifically looking at each portion of those vertebra because the anatomy is all overlying one another
We need to systematically go through the regions look at the virtual body look at the pedicle then look at our transverse
Processes then look at our paws into
Articularis as well as our facet joints then look at our laminar heading back towards our spinous processes
If we can go through the cervical spine x-ray systematically like that
We're much less likely to miss anything and if you remember one thing is look at the surrounding soft tissue
That can often be the clue that something sinister is happening within the bones of the cervical spine
So thank you very much for watching today's video
I'm really appreciating all the comments and the messages that I've been getting saying I must continue this series
So that's what we're gonna do. I'll see you all in the next video. Goodbye everybody
Hi, guys. Dr. Gillard here. Thanks for coming over to another video. This is a very special
video, How to Read Your Cervical MRI. I've been wanting to do this for a long time and
I had a week off between my winter and spring quarters, and so I spent the last four days
putting this together for you. And if you can get through this and understand this, I guarantee
you will know how to read cervical MRIs. For you primary health care providers, I have a lot of
followers with that regard. This is going to be really valuable to you because you can't rely on
radiology reports, right? They're not that accurate. There's research on that. I have it posted on my
chirogeek.com. So you've got to be able to see things with your own eyes. So this will be a good
overview for you. What are we going to do? So we're going to start out talking about body planes,
coronal, what's a coronal cut? What's a sagittal cut? What's an axial cut? And as I go through,
we're going to show you, using real human bones, what we're looking at. And then I'm going to show
you CT images and CT myelogram images and then MRI images. So I'm going to start teaching you right
away and we're going to build. And then after this video, I just finished making one where you
and I are going to go over my cervical MRI and we're going to use all the techniques and the new
stuff that you learned in this video just to kind of put things all together. So anyway,
now disclaimer, this is for educational purposes only, right? I'm not trying to interfere with any
doctor-patient relationship and you don't ever use what I teach you here to second-guess you
radiologist. If you have a question about your MRI, you call your radiology center and ask them
or you can call me or email me and if it's out of a coaching session, we can go through your
cervical MRI together and I can see how good you've gotten at reading your your imaging.
Okay, so I'm going to put my head down and get to work on this PowerPoint presentation and I
really hope you like it. All right, here we go. How to read your cervical MRI. But first,
let me do a quick plug for my coaching service business. So as you may or may not know, I do
make myself available to the general public for patients who have chronic pain and it's just not
getting better and they don't know what to do. My bread and butter case is the patient has went to a
spine surgeon and the surgeon has said, yep, we got to set you up for surgery in two weeks
and they've spent five minutes with the patient. They didn't show the patient their MRIs. The patient
doesn't know what's a matter, what the surgeon's going to do, or why they're going to do it and I
get a lot of cases like that. I also get a lot of cases where the patient has been to three, four,
even five surgeons and they've all said something different and they're really confused on what to
do. So they want someone without a dog in the fight, so to speak, who's been doing this a long
time and can give them a neutral opinion based on the medical literature database.
And yep, I really enjoy that. So if you're interested, just send me an email at chirogeek.chirogeek.com
or you can go, if you want to learn more, you can go to my website chirogeek.com, go to the coaching
tab right here, and you can read all about the coaching service. But send me an email and give
me one paragraph about what's going on and how I can help you. Don't write a book. I don't need
to read that. I just need just like one paragraph and we'll get into everything that's going on
during the coaching session, but I don't need that in an initial email. I get a lot of emails,
so I really appreciate you being concise and to the point. And then, yeah, and then I'll get back
to you and tell you whether or not I think you're a good candidate for the coaching. And please
check out my testimonial page. I have some wonderful testimonials from some many, many
different professions, from pastors to emergency room physician, physical therapist, federal judge,
physician. I have several physician testimonials, professor, veterinarian, several chiropractic
testimonies, several engineers, orthopedic knee surgeon, navy pilot, several different lawyers,
so I have, and then just run of the mill, housewives, and just normal people as well.
So go check those out if you have any doubt. All right, with that said, let's get back to
this, how to read your cervical MRI. Also, if you're, have a lumbar MRI, this is not going to
be for you, although it's similar, but I do have a dedicated how to read your lumbar MRI video.
Just go to YouTube and type in Dr. Jillard, or just type in how to read your MRI, Dr. Jillard,
and my video will pop right up. All right, now we're going to start out with some medical
directional language, basically the body planes. If you want to understand more about that, here's
a video. Again, go to YouTube and type in Dr. Jillard medical directional language, and this one
will pop up, and you can get into the weeds a little more on this. I'm going to teach you the
basics though, and let's actually do that right now, the body planes. So, and you should understand
some other basic terms. Basically, this is the anatomical position of the body. To the front
is anterior, that's the word we use, to the front or ventral. To the back is posterior or dorsal.
Toward the top is superior or cranial, I won't use that word for you, but toward the bottom is
caudal or inferior. Lateral means toward the side, away from the midline of the body. The midline
would be a line, like your spine is pretty much the midline of the body. Laterals away from that,
toward the midline of the body is medial, and I think most of you know that. Go to that video,
that medical directional language, if you were confused on that. You definitely need to know
these planes though. So, we can put slices through the human body. So, if I slice you like this green
plane is going here, that's called an axial plane, and there's AKAs for that. A hat or chat is the,
for all the AKAs, cross-sectional, horizontal, axial, transverse are all the same. In radiology
speak, they always use axial, so that's what we'll talk about. Now, if we put a plane like this,
I guess that's an orange color, kind of running down like this. I don't know if I'll be, you'll see
me on this, but that is called a sagittal plane. Specifically, if it goes right through your nose,
that's a mid-sagittal plane. Off to the side, maybe through your trap, in the same plane,
that's a parasagittal plane. And then, if we put a plane like the pink one here, going through the
shoulders, that's called a coronal plane, coronal plane. And let's talk, let's kind of expand on
that now. Now, there are some grossness here. We've got some cadaver slices coming up. So,
if you're sensitive, you might want to not watch this video, or at least not watch the next few
slides, right? So, how do you make an axial plane? Specifically, if this was a tree, your body was a
tree, and you wanted to cut the tree down to see the rings, and took a chainsaw and sawed right
through the tree, you would get, you would get this look. So, here's a, here's a body sliced up into
a million pieces via Photoshop. And these are called axial cuts, axial cuts. Now, we can make the axial
cuts by standing from the side. We can make them from standing in the front. And this will make
more sense later, but we can make them several different ways, but we can't view them very well,
standing off to the side, or standing from the front, or even standing from the back. To view
the work, or to view these cuts, you have to go from overhead or underneath, right? So, if I pulled
one of these slabs, or these cuts out and threw it on the table, we can look at it from overhead,
and that's called an axial cut. That's a vertebra. And we'll get into that, just kind of wetting
your appetite for this stuff, okay? And that's the way MRI works. We can use one image to select a
cut, and see that cut on the other half of your screen, right? So, for example, this is kind of a
coronal view. We can use the coronal view to select a cut that the MRI machine has made,
and then we can view that on the, split the screen in half. On the other half, we can view that cut
as an axial cut, and that'll make more sense. I'm just wetting your appetites now, okay? Now,
here's the gross stuff. So, sagittal cut. So, this time, we're standing right in front of the person,
and we're cutting them. It'll take the chainsaw, if you will. It's a terrible analogy, but you'll
remember it. You chop them down in the center like this, right through. Now, I could stand,
you know, to make sagittal cuts, you have to stand either in front of them. You could go overhead
and make cuts as well, but the cuts have to be in this plane. And now, you can see a three-dimensional
plane of a mid-sagittal cut. You can see the brain, and the tongue is split in half here,
and you can see the cervical spine is split in half. So, that's a mid-sagittal cut. But the same
point, just because we're standing in front of this person to make the cuts, we can't really
see them like that. To see them, you have to go around to the sides, from a lateral view, or from
a sagittal plane. So, these types of, they're called sagittal cuts, because you can only see them
in the sagittal plane. But they're made from A to P, or from S to I, or I to S. And that'll make
more sense when we get to that. So, there's a sagittal cut, a mid-sagittal cut. That's an MRI.
You can see the bones, and we'll get into all that here in a second. And then, we have coronal
cuts. We're not going to show you too many of these. A lot of times, the cervicals don't include
coronal cuts. But now, you have to stand either from the side of the patient and put the cuts.
You'll kind of make the chainsaw go up and down here. Or, you could go overhead and do this as
well. But these would be the, and these are called cut lines. And these thicknesses are cut, the
thicknesses of cut. I'll talk about three millimeter cuts as the standard. You shouldn't have five
millimeter cuts. Those are too wide. So, the width of these cuts is important.
But, see, this cut right here is about the cut that you can see on this cadaver. This is a
plastinated cadaver here. So, these are called coronal cuts. Coronal cuts are viewed from
the front. Or, you could say they can be viewed from behind as well. They're not viewed from the
side though. They're made from the side. Right? So, here's an example of a spine, a coronal
slice of the cervical spine. Right? And, pretty soon, you'll understand what all these bones are.
All right? Is that good? So, if you're confused on that, watch it again or go back and watch that
more medical directional language video will help you with that. Now, let's get into the anatomy.
So, we have to do some anatomy here, right? Because you want to understand what you're looking at
if you don't know what the bones are. Right? You've got to understand this stuff. And, yeah, well,
as we go here, I'm not just using bones. I'm going to be using images as well. So,
you're going to be learning MRI and CT right now as you go along now that you understand the cuts
and the body planes. All right? And, this is an advanced video. If you want to go into the
weeds and the cervical spine, here's an hour and 40 minute video that's purely dedicated to the
cervical spine. Everything you could ever possibly want to know about the cervical spine is right
here. All right? So, what is the cervical spine anyway? Let's start with the basics. It's the
neck bones. So, these are the bones that are inside the middle of your neck. You could say it's between
the skull and the thoracic spine. And, they're made of building blocks. So, here's some building
blocks stacked on top of one another. Now, what's not drawn here is a disc. So, there would be an
inner vertebral disc separating each of these bones. And, that's an important concept because
many of you listening right now have disc herniations. And, so, we'll talk a little bit
about what that is. But, yeah. So, that's the deal with that. Now, they're not just stacked
willy-nilly. They're stacked in a special way. And, so, what is the stacking confirmation or
stacking arrangement? From an A to P view, like you're looking at me right now from the anterior
to posterior, you should the bone should be stacked straight. They shouldn't be crooked.
If you stack them, if you view from the side, like if you're viewing this way, there should be a
curve, a lordotic curve associated with those. Right? And, this lordotic curve could said to be
convex anterior to posterior, concave posterior to anterior. Let's take a look at that.
So, let me get my drawing tools out again. So, here is a cartoon of a lateral view or a sagittal
view of this human. And, you can see there is a little curve right here. On the CT scan over here,
you can really see a much more normal curve. The drawing should be curved more.
This is to the anterior, right? The nose is anterior. There's the base, the hairline there.
That's posterior. How do you tell on a CT lateral or MRI lateral which way is forward,
which way is back? Here's a pro tip. You can look for this little weird bone, this peg.
See, this is a very strange bone. Most of the bones are like those building blocks I showed you,
except for C2 has this peg called the adontoid process. That's sticking out. And, that is always
forward. If you see that, you should see another piece of bone back here. Then, you should see
the vertebral foramen right here. And, this will make more sense as we go through. So, look for
that dance. Or, you could look for all this black. This is air. So, this is the oral pharynx and
laryngopharynx, which is filled with air. Here's the trachea down here. So, that's another way to
tell the front. That's always, of course, your Adam's apple. Right underneath that is your trachea.
That's filled with air. And, air shows up black on CT imaging and on MRI imaging.
Right? So, that's the lordosis there. You could say from an A to P view, that it's convex. Or,
from a P to A view, it should be concave. In any regard, this is called a lordotic curve. That's
very, very important for normal biomechanics. I took a bunch of slides out because it was way too
long. But, I showed you some abnormal biomechanics and how that can mess things up. It could cause
osteoarthritis. It can cause fractures. It can cause discurneations when this is messed up.
Or, I'm not going to get it. I'm just trying to get you to read these things. We're not talking
about pathology today. All right? So, this is a coronal view. So, this is looking at me right
straight on. And, here's a great, I demonstrated my amazing photoshop skills where I photoshopped a
real cervical spine in about where it would be anatomically. And, this is a straight spine. It
shouldn't be crooked. And, here's one of my patients also demonstrating a four-level ACDF.
And, it's pretty straight. It's not perfectly straight, but it's pretty. It's much better than
it used to be. Okay? All right? Here is another A to P and lateral. So, this is an MRI series. A
little bit harder to read MRI than it compared to CT. It looks just like anatomy. But, you can see
there's a coronal cut right through the vertebral bodies. And, you can see the spine is nice and
straight. And, this is a sagittal cut also through the vertebral bodies. And, we can see that there
is a curve. It's actually a little straight here, but it's still a pretty decent curve. It's not
reversed. I mean, some people's curves, they go backwards like that. And, I had some images. If
you want to watch that really long video, I put that in and talk about that. All right. So, now,
let's meet the blocks. Let's meet the vertebrae that make up these curves. So, we have atypical
vertebrae and typical vertebrae. The atypical ones are not going to talk too much about because
things usually don't go wrong up there very often. That's atlas and axis. We'll look at those at the
end. But, the typical cervical vertebrae are the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
cervical vertebrae. That's the end of the cervical spine. There's only seven blocks.
Then, it starts the thoracic spine. And, C for cervical. So, these are called C1, C2, C3, C4,
C5, C6, C7. So, C7 is a little weird. It's not perfectly typical. It's a little atypical, but
it's generally clumped in there with the typical cervical vertebrae. And, here's a C5 and C6,
typical vertebrae from the front. So, this is a anterior to posterior view. We'll talk about all
these parts here in a little bit. But, basically, an important concept is a motion segment. So,
this is a cervical motion segment. Motion segment is a top bone, a inner vertebral disc, and a
bottom bone sandwiched together. This is the functional unit of the spine. That applies to the
thoracic and lumbar spine as well. Here's a P to A, or from behind view, of atlas and axis. And,
now, you can see that little pig. And, I won't go say anything more about these because we're going
to dig into them in a little bit. So, from an overhead view, the typical cervical vertebrae
really have two main parts. They have a vertebral body, which is a block, kind of a rectangle of
bone in the front. And, then, there's an arch of bone behind. And, it literally is an arch of bone.
So, it creates a hole right here, a very important hole, called the vertebral foramen. And, collectively,
these vertebral foramen make up the vertebral canal, which is a bony hole, or passageway,
for the spinal cord, the delicate spinal cord, or in the lumbar spine, the corticoina.
There is a sac around here as well. I guess we'll show you that right now. I guess we can use blue.
There is a sac of dura mater called the thecal sac, or the dural sac, which is important. And,
that dural sac is filled with cerebral spinal fluid, which baves and nourishes the spinal cord
and the corticoin as well. So, that's an important concept, that thecal sac. So, I'm getting off base
a little, because this is a simple slide. Vertebrae, two parts. Vertebral body, arch of bone,
called the vertebral arch, or the neural arch sometimes. You shouldn't call this a posterior
arch, though. That's reserved for C1 only. All right. So, here's an overhead view of a typical
cervical vertebrae. And, we can clearly see the vertebral body right here. And then, get my drawing
tools out again, we can see the arch. Technically, the arch starts right here. That's kind of the
roof of the vertebral frame, if you will. The arch is connected to the bone by this, or connected
to the vertebral body by this. That's called the pedicle. I'm getting ahead of my slides, though.
But, basically, these are the two parts. Right? Now, what are the parts of the vertebral arch?
So, let's just jump over to the pedicle. You can read through that if you want. Or, let's just jump
over to the next slide and look. So, we have, there's a vertebral body, there's a vertebral arch,
but now, we can break that vertebral arch down into pieces. So, the pedicle is the strongest
part of the vertebrae period. It's said to connect the vertebral body with the vertebral arch.
The vertebral arch is made up of the articular pillars, which we'll look at individually. These
are coming in and out of the plane of the page. It's a pillar of bone. It also contains the,
makes up the facet joint, which is really important. Then, we have a lamina. And then,
we repeat on the other side, lamina, articular pillar, and pedicle. Right? So, it's pretty simple,
simple concept.
Right? Here's a CT image. Somebody tell me what type of image, what type of cut this is.
Is it an axial cut, a sagittal cut, or a coronal cut?
Now, we're looking down at the block here. It's the same cut as that. So, this is an overhead
cut called an axial cut. And, we can see the parts. There's the pedicle in blue. There's the
articular pillar. Now, it's just a cut. It's only two or three millimeters thick. So, there's no
three-dimensionality to this. But, but we could keep going. We could cut down deeper and deeper.
And, this pedicle, this articular pillar would keep going where the pedicle wouldn't.
You'll understand more in a minute when we get to that part. And, there's the lamina there.
Okay? So, pretty straightforward. Here's an MRI. See, this is why I introduce CT to you.
It's easier to teach CT than it is MRI. But, we can still see the MRI. Here's the vertebral
body, of course. And, here's the pedicle. So, this means it's a cut. This is an axial cut through
the pedicles. Okay? There's the pedicle. Articular pillar would be right here. Here's the lamina.
That's pretty easy to see. Okay? And, then it repeats over here. Here's the other lamina.
Great. And, here's the thecal sac. You can see the block right here. That's the thecal sac,
which is that sac that holds all that white stuff, that cerebral spinal fluid.
We'll learn that this is a T2 weighted image. That's why we can see the water so nicely. And, yeah.
Now, we have some projections we can talk about real quickly. Coming off what we've learned so far,
we have transverse processes which stick out on each side. They kind of face forward about 45
degrees. I could have made them go forward a little bit further. And, then there's a spinous
process. So, this thing kind of looks like an airplane from overhead view.
Unique to the cervical spine. These are biphid. These are split spinous processes,
which is nowhere else in the body. And, these are also split transverse processes. There's an
anterior and posterior strut, which is not seen anywhere else in the body. So, here's a real
bone that we can see overhead. And, you can see there's the anterior strut,
posterior strut. This whole structure is the transverse process.
The pedicle would be right here. Pedicle. Here's the articular pillar. You can see how that makes
up a piece of the vertebral arch. Here's the lamina. Here's the other lamina. Articular pillar,
pedicle. Got it? Now, if we move over to a, this is a slice through the pedicles. Again,
it's an actual slice of CT, which is easy to see. We can easily see there's the anterior strut
of the transverse process, posterior strut. There's the spinous process. And, we've went
over all those other parts enough. I think you can figure that out. These are the vertebral
foramen. Or, they're called transverse foramen. The vertebral artery runs through here. And,
I'm not going to get into the weeds on that. You can watch that other video if you want to learn
more about that. That's usually not clinically, occasionally it can be clinically significant,
but usually not. So, we don't need to talk about it. All right. So, there's just another picture.
This is C7. It does not have a bifed spinous process. And, yeah, another cut through the pedicles.
And, you can see the transverse process. You can see the spinal cord. You can even see the nerve
roots here. Okay. Now, this is an important concept. The articular pillars in this always
confuses students. So, we have to look from the side of the vertebrae. Really, this is kind of a
from the front, from the side, kind of a oblique view, it's called, because I can see the neural
foramen here. But, this is the articular pillar, this whole thing right here. And, it looks like
a pillar of bone, right? The tops and bottoms of these articular pillars, they come together
to form a joint, right? Just like your thigh bone comes together with your
leg bone to form the knee joint. Same deal here. Your superior articular process, which is right
here, comes together with your inferior articular process. So, I should back up and explain that
this is the articular pillar, but it's made up of two parts. If we cut it in half here,
this is called the superior articular process. This is called the inferior articular process.
All right. So, that's the articular pillar. Why do we care about this articular pillar?
It's a big deal about that. If you get arthritis and get a degenerative bone spur, sometimes you
can get these little points of bone that come out like that, and they can stab the nerve root.
There's a nerve root that comes out of here and goes down your arms, and you can get stabbed by
this arthritic change of the articular pillar. Specifically, it's usually the superior articular
process that dumps that. All right. So, here's a coronal view. There's that pillar of bone again,
so we always know that C2. And you can see this is a cut. So, my cut line, which we'll talk about,
a cut line would go like this. This is the slice I'm looking at. If I threw that slice over here
and looked at it from the front, this is what I'd see. And we can see the articular pillar.
And this is a superior articular process, inferior articular process, but the whole thing
is called the articular pillar. And the articular pillars make up these super important facet
joints, which we'll talk about more officially in a second. Everybody got it? So, here is a MRI cut
through the articular pillars. Sometimes they're hard to see, but you can see them.
Get my drawing tools out again. Right? Here's an inferior articular process,
superior articular process. And you can see where they come together, it forms a real joint. So,
these are the joints in your spine called the facet joints, or the zygopathosil joints, or is
the real word for those, or the Z joints. Everybody in the real world calls them facet joints.
Are we good? Okay. Now, the facet joints, as we've talked about a little already, they're super
clinically important because they're a real diarthrodial joint. Okay? So, that means that
it's a real joint. There's an inferior articular process and a superior articular process.
It has articular cartilage on it. There's articular cartilage, just like your knee has
articular cartilage and a meniscus. It doesn't have a meniscus, but it has articular cartilage,
which is a pad that protects the delicate bone underneath. If you wear a hole in this pad,
you're going to get really, really bad facet joint pain, just like someone who's worn out their
knees. They've worn the cartilage away in their knees. You can do that with a facet joints and you
can get horrible pain, which sometimes the only treatment is to fuse those together so they don't
rub on each other anymore. There's no joint replacement that you can do for the facet joints.
And yeah, there's the synovial membrane that laps over the top or loops over the top and
secretes synovial fluid. So, there's like a little oil in here to keep these joints nice and slippery.
But yeah, all kinds of things that can go wrong with them. So, there's a cartoon. They have a
capsule around them so the synovial fluid doesn't leak out. So, a real important concept. There's
that same picture in reality in the body that would, I mean, you would see like a tough capsule
around here. You wouldn't see the joint like that. If you poked a hole in the capsule, the fluid would
run out of it. Got it? All right, and there's no cell septors in there as well. They're just like
your knee joint has pain fiber in it, so does the facet joint. And specifically, they're supplied by
the medial branch of the posterior ramus. Some of you have had medial branch blocks, right? Oh,
you know that word. And because it's the medial branch of the posterior ramus that carries the
sense of the sense of nocioception or the sense of pain. And this is one of the big causes of chronic
pain or problems with that facet joint. Either the articular cartilage has worn away, that synovium
can get trapped inside the joint and cause pain. The facet joint capsule can get caught inside the
joint and cause pain. Okay, so let's do a little neural anatomy. I'm not going to go crazy again.
You can go to that other video if you want to go into the weeds on this. But this is,
there's our articular pillar. There's our facet joint. This is the hole we're going to talk about
next. So, I could have waited, but I'm going to talk about it right now instead. This is the
exceeding nerve root right here. You can, in general, this is the exceeding nerve root. It's
actually made up of several parts that we can talk about. And let me get my marker out here. So,
anteriorly, we have a motor root right here. Posteriorly, we have a sensory root that carries the
sensation. If you hit your thumb with a hammer, the signals go into your brain, go that direction
into the spinal cord. And if you want to pull your hand away from a hot flame, the muscles that do
that, the brain orders it, the signals going that way through these nerve roots. And there's tiny
little roots within here, right? These are just covers for thousands of things called axons.
But anyway, there's the dorsal ganglia. That's kind of the brain of the sensory root. From here to
here in this cartoon is the official spinal nerve. The spinal nerve is always named by the
bottom member of the motion segment. We'll see in a minute that this hole called the neural
foramen or the inner vertebra frame is formed by C5 and C6. This nerve always gets the name of the
bottom member of the motion segment. So, that's the C6 spinal nerve. Then that splits into a
ventral ramus. So, that goes down into your brachial plexus and forms some of the big nerves,
the median nerve. So, that goes to the brachial plexus and will eventually go all the way down
your arm. Then we have some nerves going to the posterior. So, this is called the posterior ramus.
Posterior ramus splits into a lateral branch which is coming out of the plane of the page. It goes
to some of the neck muscles. And then there's the important medial branch. Medial branch splits
and it supplies the facet joint with nocioception and proprioception. So, it gives you a little bit
of balance function. But more importantly, this is where the signal of pain will travel through
this medial branch. There's an upper branch and lower branch. The lower branch goes into the
z-joint or the facet joint below. So, pain management doctors have to block both of these
if they're going to do a rhizotomy. It can be pretty tricky. And sometimes there's an intermediate
branch, but yeah. So, that's your neural anatomy. You know, play that back and think about that a
few times. Clinically, I mean the bottom line is the nerve, the delicate nerve runs through this
neural foramen and it's delicate. If it gets pinched or poked by bones, remember we said a
bone spurt can grow off the superior ticular process and stab it. You're going to have horrible
pain down your arms. You're going to be dropping things. You might be able to, your keyboard and
mousing might be a trouble. It could have burning pain in the skin. It could be, it could be a bone
spur. It could be a disc herniation. It could pinch it. An unsonate process spur could pinch it.
There's three things that could pinch it right there. All right, but that's not the goal of this
video. Okay, we've talked about it. Let's talk about it officially. So, the neural foramen are
those little holes that we just looked at. They're on the interlateral side of the leg. They're formed
by two, the members of the motion segment coming together. Super clinically important, as I just
said, because the nerves can get pinched as they come out. And there's the official view of it is
right there. We kind of already talked about it. It does have some borders, so this is a nerd alert.
You don't have to know all this, but I mean the superior ticular process is a big one because
you can get bone spurs and stab the nerve there. But the inferior ticular process is the border,
posterior border. The vertebral body is an anterior border. The disc is an anterior border. This thing,
which we'll talk about, it's called the unsonate process is an anterior border. So, those are
important. The pedicle. The pedicles make up the roof and the floor. So, this is the pedicle right
here, right? So, that's the floor. The other pedicle is here. It's kind of the transverse
process is blocking your view, right? And we won't talk to me and there's a soup here and
in for your vertebral notch. You don't have to worry about that. My students do though.
All right. And there's, we've already discussed these structures, but you can see how the nerve
comes out. And yeah, that's a very clinically important thing. On an overhead view, it's harder
to see the neural foramen, but we can try to draw it in. So, the neural foramen or the inner
vertebral foramen would be right here. Well, how do I know? Because there's a superior ticular process
coming out of the plane of the page. So, I know that's the back end of the neural foramen. And
there's the unsonate process and part of the disc making up the anterior border. So, this region
right here is the neural foramen, right? And you can see how the nerves, a better drawing of the
nerves, you can see the anterior ramus and the posterior ramus here. They just, they didn't draw
all the splits. All right. And you can see the delicate spinal cord here as well. Got it? All
right. So, there's another picture. You can see the neural foramen quite nicely here on this.
This is a CT scan. See how we can, we can look at these slices and see. Here's an MRI. This is,
now what view is this? No, it's not axial. It's not coronal. This is a side view. There's the dens
to the side and there's the anterior tubercle valus. So, this is a sagittal view. You can't see,
you can't see the neural foramen on a coronal view or really on an axial view. You can't see
real holes like this. Only a sagittal or better yet an oblique view. You can see those. So, here's
the overhead view of an MRI. And again, you can see the neural foramen right here.
Quite nicely. Spinal cord, fecal sac with cerebral spinal fluid, disc,
spinous process, lamina. Got it? See, you're learning how to read your MRIs already. We're not even to
that part yet. All right. Here's another oblique series you can see. Again, this is, I was going to
take this out because I didn't want to get into this. This patient has a tumor on one of the nerves.
See how big the tumor is in the hole? There's a hole there, a hole there. They kind of fade out here.
They have a little scoliosis so you can't quite see them. Are we good? Okay. The last thing to
talk about, and we've talked about it already, is this vertebral canal that's made by this arch of
bone. It's got a roof. So, the roof is the lamina, basically, in the articular pillars.
And it's got a floor. The floor is the vertebral bodies and the disc and then the sides of the
pedicles. Who cares about the vertebral canal? Well, I took these slides out, but people can get
stenosis in here. If you get a big disc herniation or a big disc bulge that goes back like this,
there's the disc, which we'll talk about in a minute. And then you get ligamentum
flavum thickening back here. You can start to smash the thiccosac and smash the spinal cord down flat.
And that's a really common. I have many clients with that problem with myelopathy.
So, you can watch the other video if you want to get into that because that's a long, long one.
This is long enough. All right. So, there's the vertebral canal. I think we've talked about
everything there already. Another mid-sagittal slice of the vertebral canal. Nice lordosis.
Everything's great. Okay. Overhead views of the vertebral canal. Now, what views are these?
Tell me what views these are. Good. They're axial views. And this is a CT. This is a little tricky.
This is a CT miligram. So, all this white is cerebral, would be cerebral spinal fluid.
But normally, you wouldn't see this on a CT scan. The only reason we could see it
is because they've injected contrast into the canal or into the thiccosac. This is an inter-thical
injection. And we can see it because of that. So, there's the spinal cord. We can see the nerve
roots. There's the motor root right here. There's the sensory root toward the back. You can see them
on both sides. And, yep. So, this is an axial MRI. And you can see cerebral spinal fluid,
but you can also see fat. This is epidural fat here as well. So, sometimes it's a little bit
harder to see. But, I mean, this is the gold standard, a CT miligram. If you can't figure
something out, you always order one of these. You don't like to though because it's radiation.
Okay, another one is the unsinate processes and the importance of the oncovertebral joints.
So, unsinate processes look like Batman's ears. They stick up from the anterior lateral part
of typical cervical vertebrae. I think we can just look at a picture here. So, this is an oblique
view of a bone C5 cervical vertebrae. And it's got these weird Batman ears sticking up. No other
bones have those. And those are called unsinate processes. And notice that the unsinate process
actually makes up the front part of the neuroferamine where the nerve is. So, then, if you get a bone
spur off here, you can stab the nerve root here. Here's the suprarticular process. We talked about
a bone spur there, but both of these bone spurs off either one of these can stab the nerve root
and cause horrible arm pain in people. Okay, so it's clinically important. So, it meets. There's
a better drawing. There's the articular pillar. Here's another view of it. You can see there's
the unsinate process and the real human bones here. There's a facet that it meets right here
called the facet for the unsinate process. Together, the unsinate process and the facet
for the unsinate process make a real diarthrodial joint. It's a semi diarthrodial joint. It has
synovial fluid in it, but not as much as a normal joint. It does have pain fiber in it. So, it's
capable of producing pain. And that's called the oncovertibral joint. The oncovertibral joint,
a.k.a. the joints of an lusca. And they can be, they can cause trouble. Here's another view. You
can see unsinate process is here. And there's the facet for the unsinate process would be right
here. And they have a capsule over them just like a facet joint. And, yeah, cervical spine is the only
place that has these lusca joints. You don't have them in your thoracic or lumbar spine. The thought
to help stabilize the cervical spine a little bit when you bend to the side because there's no ribs
to help. And these bones are tiny. So, that's thought to be the purpose of it. Okay. Just to show
you, if we draw the nerve in there, you can see how close the nerve is to the unsinate process.
All right. Let's get into the oncovertibral disc now, which is really important. A lot of my clients
have disc herniations. And probably some of you watching have disc herniations. So,
I'm not going to go into the weeds again. Go to that video if you want to go into the weeds on
this stuff. But so, here's a coronal view from the front. You can see the discs between all the
vertebrae, right? There's no disc gaps between C1 and C2 though. That's a noteworthy thing there.
The disc is made up of an annulus fibrosis and a nucleus papulsus. So, here's a classic cartoon of it.
So, here's the nucleus papulsus. It's made up of proteoglycan molecules. The cells make proteoglycans
which grab water. So, it's about 80% water. And this squishy, it's like a toothpaste consistency.
It's held in place by these really strong rings of type 1 collagen. They're called lamellae.
And all these lamellae make up a structure called the annulus fibrosis. So, for you lay people,
just the nucleus is the squishy toothpaste in the middle. And it's held in place by these rings of
these lamellae, these type 1 super strong, like a steel-belted radial tire. Instead of air, you
have toothpaste here, but these are the steel belts that prevent punctures. To the posterior,
we have another set of nerves. This is the number one cause of chronic back pain, middle back pain,
or neck pain, is when these nerve roots get set off or when these noceoceptors get set off.
Noceoceptor is a little pain trigger. It's a little tiny nerve that if you stimulate it,
it sends the signal of pain to your brain. And so, if these get stimulated, you can have horrible
neck pain to the point you have to take the disc out to stop the irritation of these things.
What causes the disc to, what sets these things off usually? Again, I took these slides out because
I don't want to make this longer than it's already going to be. But if you get a rip through the
annulus fibrosis, that's called an annular tear. And my website I have talked about annular
tears at chirogig.com website. And I have videos on annular tears. But if this material in the
center, the nucleus papulsis goes through the tear and gets out here. In some people, but not all
people, it can spark a horrible inflammation. And once an inflammation occurs, the sensation that
triggers these noceoceptors to send pain up to the brain. And the patient says, ouch, my neck is
killing me. If it keeps going, sometimes it rips right out and you get a herniation. So that's
a herniation is a continuation. It's a worsening of the annular tear. So you can watch the longer
video if you want to get more into the weeds on that. That's all I'm going to say about that,
because my mission is just to get you to read these things. Overhead view, you can see there's the
nucleus papulsis. You can see it's really close to especially the motor root right here. So you,
again, you can get disc herniation that rips, starts as an annular tear. And then the herniated,
the nucleus papulsis can come right out and smash all this and irritate these nerve roots.
And then the patient suffers horrible pain down the arm and dysfunction. They can't hold things.
They get weak. They can't, they don't have fine manipulation anymore. They can't
mouse or they can't keyboard and they can't sleep because their arm is burning. It's typically a
disc herniation. That's what we're going to look at. You do coaching with me to look at your MRI.
That's, those are the things we look for very carefully. Right? Here's the disc from the side.
There's the, remember the disc is named by the bone that sits on top of it. So here's the C2,
right? There's the peg. So we know that's C2 and that's C3. So that's the C2, C2 disc,
C3 disc, C4 disc, et cetera, et cetera, five, six, seven. That's the T1 disc.
Right? There's the spinal cord right there. The white is cerebrospinal fluid. This is a,
what kind of cut? You tell me, what kind of cut? It's a mid sagittal cut. Right? Here's an axial cut
where we can see the spinal cord cerebrospinal fluid. There's the disc right there.
And those are the unsinate processes there in white. Those are the vertebra arteries here and here.
The neuroferamen. So this is a cut through the neuroferamina. See how that works?
Right? Now on a CT scan, the disc is pretty hard to see, isn't it? Now sometimes they'll give you a
soft tissue series, which makes it easier to see. But I mean, where's the disc? It's like an X-ray.
You can't really see the disc. You can actually see if you look really close. You can see a shadow
of herniation right there. But they're really, for lay people, I wouldn't use these. You're going to
use your MRI to look for disc herniations. Okay? The disc is named, we already said,
by the bone that sits on top of it. So we've covered that already.
All right. Let's talk just a little bit about atlas and axis. Atlas is C1. It's the top bone.
It has no vertebra body. It's very strange. It has two lateral masses, an anterior and a posterior
arch, and that's it. It connects to the occipit or to the skull via the occipital condyles. The joint
between atlas and axis is called the atlantoaxial occipital joint. The joint between atlas and
C2 is called the atlantoaxial joint. My coaching session patients, you guys don't need to know
that. But there it is. So I can just draw it real quick. So this is an overhead view of atlas. It's
made up of these two lateral masses, an anterior arch, or I'm sorry, anterior arch, and a posterior
arch. There's the anterior tubercle, which is what we can see on CT. The dens would be sitting
right here, and then still have transverse process. We don't have a spinous process. We have a
posterior tubercle here, but we still have the vertebra framing right here. And that's about
all we'll say about that. And here it is again. This is an MRI. You can actually see the tongue
and the lips. They didn't columnate on this one. The nose is right here, and you can see there's,
there is the dens. There's that peg that I told you to look for, and that's always toward the tongue,
or you could look for the black, and that's air in the oropharynx and the ringopharynx here.
And this thing, there's the anterior tubercle of atlas. There's the posterior
tubercle of atlas. A little bit of posterior arch is in there as well.
That's all we can see. How come we can't see the whole thing? Well, this is a slice. It's only a
two millimeter slice of this image, and the lateral masses are out of the plane of the page and into
the plane of the page. Got it? Axis has the peg we've talked about it called the dens or the
adontoid process. It's where you, you can twist and turn your head to the side through that.
There's the bones, the real cadaver bones. You can see the peg that's sticking up.
Emrologically speaking, this is actually the body of atlas. This is where the body went.
I have tons of videos on this. You can go into the weeds if you want on this stuff. I'm not going
to go much on it here. Here's a CT slice right through the dens. We can see the lateral masses
of atlas here, and these are the occipital condyles, and these are these two joints. This is the joint.
The top of the spine connects to the skull through the atlas occipital joint,
and the atlas and axis are connected via the atlas axial joint. Here's a sagittal or here's an axial
cut. You can see, here's a, that cut would be going, let's see, we got the lateral masses
and the atlas there. So that cut would be going just like something like that, where we can see
the dens and we can see the lateral mass of atlas. It looks like there's the spinal cord,
and that's all I'll say about that. All right, so finally, drum roll. Congratulations,
you made it this far. You are ready to get into MRI more, so let's get into MRI more.
All right, what is an MRI anyway? It's a test, of course, and you've guys have all had it, right?
If you're watching this video, you've had an MRI, so you know exactly what it is, but
it's a test that your doctor orders, and you go to an MRI facility, and it's a giant,
noisy machine, and what it does is it cuts your spine up into your cervical spine or whatever
they order it on, it cuts it up into pieces, and it cuts it up into pieces in accord with those
planes that we talked about. So you get a, and those, they're called series, you get different
series. Well, let me stay with my slides here. So it cuts it up into this, so you can have axial
cuts. Let's do this over. All right, you've made it. So what is an MRI? Let's dig into what an MRI is,
and you guys know what an MRI is, right? You wouldn't be here if you haven't had an MRI. Your doctor
orders this test, you go to an MRI center, an imaging center, and they put you in this tight
tube, and they give you earplugs, the machine is so noisy, and that machine makes cuts or slices
through the target area, and in our case, cervical spine was the target, and they,
they just don't do it willy-nilly. They make slices in the axial plane. They make a whole bunch
of slices in the axial plane. All those slices are grouped together into something called a
sequence or a series, and then they, remember the radio, the, the technology will say, okay,
now this one, now this is going to be four minutes long, and this is going to be six minutes. Those
are all different series or, or sequences, they're aka's for each other. So then they're going to do
the sagittal series, and then they say, okay, Mr. Jones, you're doing great. This one will be another
eight minutes, and then they're going to do coronal cuts through your spine. So they're doing all these
cuts in all the body planes that we learned. And here's an MRI tube, a beautiful looking three
Tesla machine. Side note, very important too, MRI technicians, especially toward the end of the day,
they can get lazy, and they can, they can stop. You can get a really crummy MRI. You always, here's
a pro tip when you order an MRI, three millimeter cuts. If there, four millimeter cuts I can live
with by prefer three millimeter cuts, what's that mean? The cuts are, well, I'll show you in a second,
but the cuts are how close the slices are together. You don't want six millimeter cuts because you
might have a tumor in between there that you miss, or a bone spur that you miss. So you always want
three millimeter cuts. You want at least one series to be through the plane of the disc line.
You don't want a stack series where they just go straight down and they don't give you a cut
because it can be difficult. If you have hyperlordosis, you can, you can't see the disc. You can see
the disc in pieces. And that's kind of beyond the scope of this though. But you want one series of
cuts through the disc. And then you always want to try to get a three Tesla MRI. Those are very
powerful MRIs that give you good clear images. And you might warn them that an expert's going to be
reading your MRI. And if they're crummy MRIs, I'll be back here and you can do it again right because
they do get lazy. Case in point, here's a patient who wanted to consult with me. And I always get
your images. You don't pay me. Don't send me money until I make sure you're a candidate because this
patient sent me money before I said it was okay for him to become a client. And I had to refund
his money because I, these are worthless. These images are worthless. So here's a pretty good
series here. Right? You can see the, you can see the bones and you can see the disc and you
can see the spinal cord. What do you make of this? Right? He paid $400 for this is Florida. Florida,
they seem to, I don't want to pick on Florida, but it seems like they have MRI centers popping up
on every corner there. And some of them don't even build insurance. So they charge four or $500. And
this is the quality you get. And it's non-diagnostic. I won't, I can't consult with you if you, if this
is what you bring me. So you want to make sure you have good images. All right, enough. So where do
these slices go? Well, I said they're put together in sequences or series. That's a aka for it. I
used to say in series, but they use these two synonymously. But all these slices, like the actual
slices, they're put on a disc. And these are, there's, here's two of my latest discs from
Stanford to both of them to from Stanford. And yeah, so that's what you'll get. You shouldn't
leave the MRI center until you say, you know what, I'll wait. Can you burn me a disc? I need to take
that to my doc. And you wait like five minutes usually. And they can burn, they might charge you
30 bucks for it or so. Yeah, you should. I know they never charge me for it. I mean, some of these
centers are billing $3,500 to $4,000 for these tests. They can certainly burn you a 25 cent disc.
Don't have it. If you're coming to see me too, don't get it password protected. That's a real
pain in the rear to deal with that. Okay. But yeah, so all these similar slices, like all the actual
slices go in something called a sequence or a series. And those are placed on these discs. And
you can read these discs via DICOM viewing software. I use onus 2.5, but there's a lot of
free software you can use out there to view your MRI. And these MRI studies
are made up of at least actual and chronal series. Some of those will be T1 weighted,
some of those will be T2 weighted, some of them will be T3, no, not T3 weighted,
a proton density weighted, fat saturated, but they'll at least have T1 and T2 weighted
actual and chronal series. What T1, what are you talking about? Yep. So there's another
categorization system. It's not just axial, sagittal, coronal. There's also, they can set the machine
different, different ways to give you better clarity and to make certain things highlight
and other things not highlight. That's, I'll leave it at that. But the sequences, in addition to being
coronal, sagittal, etc., they're also T1 weighted and T2 weighted and proton density.
I'm just going to focus on T1 and T2, because sometimes that's all I get, especially on these
$400 MRIs. But there's many different types of sequences that you can get. And the sequences
also are separated by body plane cuts. So for example, I'm going to look at your T1 axial
sequences. I'm going to look at your T1 sagittal sequences. I'm going to look at your T1 and T2
axial sequences. And when you pop that, you open your, your MRI in your viewing software,
you can actually see the sequences right over here. Sometimes they'll tell you it's a sagittal
axial, especially on CT. Sometimes they won't. So you have to double click on it and load the image.
But if you look at the information here, we have a T1 sagittal sequence. This MRI center calls them
series. In fact, this is series number 16 out of 20. Right? So it even tells you the series level,
the series. So T1 sagittal series. It actually tells you what cut you're looking at. This is the
sixth cut. Sometimes instead of cuts, they call them instance. So this is a sixth instance.
But I can call most people just call them cuts. So you can get a lot of information from your MRI
software. Right? So let's look at this full scan of this. So you tell me, is a sagittal,
is this coronal, is this axial? Well, some of you went well. Let's just go look and see.
And there it is. It's sagittal. This is the T1 sagittal sequence 16. It's the same one we just
looked at. And you can see it's a side view of the MRI. We know it's a cut right through the middle.
How do we know it's a cut through the middle? Well, I can see the spinous processes. Spinous
processes are in the middle. So I know this is a mid-sagittal cut. But on your software, you would
be looking at kind of the cut line, which guides you. And I'll show you what I mean by that in a
minute. All right. So this is a T1 weighted image. This is the first one I think we've really looked
at. T1 weighting shows things that have water as dark. It makes them dark. So the cerebral spinal
fluid is now dark because it's high water content. The discs are all black because they have water
content as well. So that's kind of the story with that.
Right? So T1 versus T2. Again, T1, higher resolution. They're better for looking at if you want to try
to look for fractures. If you want to look at fractures, you really need to see a CT. But if
you want to try an MRI, you use the T1 weighted. I use them for contrast, post-contrast imaging
to differentiate recurrent herniation from scar tissue. So there's a lot of uses. I'm not going
to get into all that. But swelling and inflammation, anything with water will be black on T1 weighting.
Tumors are typically black. Cerebrospinal fluid has water. It's black. Nucleus papulsus has water.
It's black. T2 weighting is just the opposite. Anything with water like swelling, inflammation,
cerebrospinal fluid, nucleus papulsus, that has high water content. So that's going to be white
or hyper intense. This is the one for beginners. This is always look for the T2 weighting. You
can see the most on that. So let's compare side by side. So here is a mid-sagittal cut. How do I
know it's a mid-sagittal cut? There's the transverse process. So it's got to be mid-sagittal cut. Plus,
I can see, I don't see the pedicles. Because remember, there's pedicles on the side which
block my view. This is a cut between the pedicles. So I can see the spinal cord. All the cerebrospinal
fluid is black. So this must be a T1 weighted. Cerebrospinal fluid is white. So this must be a
T2 weighted. And that's exactly correct. But wait a minute. The discs are black. Why is that?
Well, these discs are whiter. These discs are blacker. That's degenerative disc disease.
So it's kind of a different... I took all those slides out because it was like two hours long
the last video I did. So we won't get into that. But look for cerebrospinal fluid. If it's white,
it's a T2. If it's black, it's a T1 weighting. Got it? Okay, look at this. I was supposed to take
this out. Just a 15-year-old girl. And some of you, your eyeballs went... This is a lumbar spine.
This is the sacrum. Whoa, what in the heck is that thing? Well, it's a big tumor of some kind
that's in the sacrum canal. If you look on T1, how do I know this is a T1 weighting?
Fecal sac is black. So all the cerebrospinal fluid is black. Fecal sac is white. So T2, T1. So this is
a cyst, something called a tarloff cyst. Usually not a problem, but in her it's actually eroding the
bone away and compressing the nerves. It's so big. So this is a problem. But that's how you can tell.
Got high water content in it. If this was black, it would be a cancerous tumor. Again, I'm not
teaching you to read for pathology, but I'd be much more nervous if this was black here and
black over here. I wouldn't. That would be scary. But this is filled with water.
Okay, MRI anatomy. I think we're pretty good at this. So we're going to look at this cut line right
here. And we're going to talk about the cut lines more in a second. So whatever I put a cut through
here is the slice that I'm going to look at. Remember, this is made up of all sorts of slices.
There's probably 30 slices that the MRI machine made in this sequence. I guess I could have made
that orange and these should be straight lines. If I want to see this slice, I can't see it.
I mean, I can see a little bit of it, but I can't see the whole thing. But if I pull it out and throw
it on the table over here and throw it in an axial series, which has given me a view from overhead,
I can see that slice and this is that slice. And we can see the disc. We can see the insinate
processes. We can see the spinal cord, the cerebrospinal fluid, superior articular process,
inferior articular process, facet joints. We can see all that stuff. Right? And I just kind of
named what I was going to do. But there's everything I just said. Ended up being the C3 disc,
lamina, spinal processes. Facet joint was made by the superior and inferior articular process.
Same deal here. So this is a sagittal. It's a mid-sagittal cut. How do I know? Because I can see
the spinal cord and I can see the spinal processes. So vertebral body, there's the disc, cerebrospinal
fluid, spinal cord. There's, let's see, posterior longitudinal ligament we haven't talked about.
That's getting a little further into the weeds. A little bulge right down here. Spinus process is
back here. We've got some epidural fat. We've got interspinus ligament, which is kind of beyond
your the scope here. The lamina is right here. Spinus processes here. Yeah, thickle sac.
See, you got this stuff. You're getting it. Now, we've got to understand this cut line. I kind of
talked about it a little bit, but that cut line, it's usually orange in color. That will allow you
to select a particular cut in a series. Because remember, the series are all the same type of
cuts. They're all axial cuts in a series. And we can select them by putting the cut line through
kind of a scout view, if you will. So let's see how this works. So remember axial. So an axial is
kind of sawing a tree. That's an axial cut, but you can't see it. You can make it from standing
in front. You can make it from standing behind or make it from standing from the side, but you can't
see it. You have to see it from overhead. So how do we see these? Well, we pull them out of this
scout view and we throw it down in the other view and look at it. So here's the tree. So this is
a cut line. This is Onus 2.5, which I recommend. I'm not sure if the company went out of business,
but you can still download the free software, which is really powerful. Osiris, for Mac people,
I'm not sure if it's still paid, but there's lots of Dicom viewing softwares that will give
you a cut line like this. So I can scroll up and down when you're coaching with me. I will scroll,
up and down on this sagittal view, or I could scroll up and down on a coronal view. It doesn't
matter, but I want to look overhead at your images. So specifically, I want to see if there's any
loosening of these vertebral body screws in this patient with the ACDF. And so I'm putting a cut
right through the screws. I can't see them here, but whatever I cut through here, I can view the
cut over here from an axial perspective. Does that make sense? So this is what the cut line shows,
and the screws look really good. I don't see any halloween, and they look like they're in
good place. See how that works? If I want to put a cut, let's the same patient, let's scroll up here
and put a cut right through the anterior tubercle and the dans in the posterior tubercle, well now
this is the cut I see, and I see everything. Here I don't see it because this is just kind of the
model, but if I slide this piece out and throw it down so we can look at it overhead in axial view,
we see the anterior tubercle, posterior, I mean we see the entire atlas. It's a beautiful cut. We
see the dens, we see the ADI space here. It's a nice looking spinal cord, a nice looking thiccosa,
it's a really normal view, a transverse framing, etc. See how that works? Now I don't have to use
this sagittal image for a scout view. If I want to see axial cuts, I could use another similar one.
I could put cuts through the coronal view, and if I put a cut right through the disc space here of
C3, I can see it right here, just like before. So you can use the coronal or the sagittal
to view the axial slices. See what that means? And that's always confusing for people.
I hope you got that. Email me if you don't understand that.
But yeah, again in my coaching session, I go up and down. We look at every single cut.
If there's 20 cuts, I'll look at every single cut through this cervical spine. We'll look at all
the axials to make sure there's not a herniation. This one looks great, doesn't it? There's
huge neural foramen right here. There's nothing. I don't see any ugly bone spurs coming off the
superarticular process or off the unsinate process. There's no bone spurs. I don't see a big disc
herniation crushing this thick sac in. And this is a special view, right? This is normally we don't
see cerebral spinal fluid. This is a CT milligram, which sometimes I have to order it though. If
people come to me, I get all the hard cases and people haven't ordered these things.
Sometimes they have to be ordered and I can catch bone spurs and things that other people
don't see because they didn't order. All right, here's another example. So we're using a sagittal
image as our scout image. I have a slice right through the C2 disc. Let's see what the axial
looks like. Yeah, it looks really good. There's the same thing. There's the facet joints there.
There's the disc unsinate processes. Spinal cord looks like a football. The spinal cord should
always look football shaped. It should never be long and skinny. All right, I think you got the
message. And then the same thing if we slice you up like this in the sagittal plane, which I could
do in the coronal plane to make the cuts, or I could go overhead and make these cuts as well.
This is what we'd see. So here's a cut. We're using the coronal plane.
And we're looking at the sagittal cut. We're looking at this orange cut only. And then you can
see it's a mid-sagittal cut. It's right in the center between the pedicles. We don't see the
pedicles. And yeah, see how that works?
All right, here's another one. I said I could use the axial plane. Let's use the axial plane. So I
put a cut right through the center again. And let's look at this cut. Let's throw it over here
in the sagittal series. And there it is. And you can see there's the spinal cord again and
another ACDF patient. And the spinal processes, the spinal processes are viewed. So that tells us
it's a cut right in the mid-sagittal plane. Got it? If I move it off to the side,
there's a cut through the neural foramen. And so there's the neural foramen right there.
See that? And this is because it has contrast. I can even see the nerve right there.
See how that works? Pretty cool. You guys are getting it. There's a cut in an MRI.
Well, the cut line, I could have put the cut anywhere here. But the cut is right through
the middle. And there's a mid-sagittal cut. Right? I think you got the picture. Got the story.
Coronal cuts. Now we have to stand from the side to put the cuts in. That's the only way you could
put these cuts. I mean, you could kind of put them. It's not very intuitive. You could go overhead
and put them maybe. But it's best to think you put them from the side, but you can't view them.
You have to stand in front to view them. Right? So let's see. So here is a, from the side, we're
making the cuts. This is just one. Remember, I could put a cut anywhere. I could look at any of
these cuts. But if we look at this cut from a coronal view, this is what it looks like. And we
can actually see, we can actually see some little bit of spur formation starting on these
insinuate processes. Another two-level fusion. See how that works? Right? Now I moved the cut line.
We took a cut line back through the spinal cord. So yeah, look, we can see the spinal cord here.
We're between, we're in the neural foramen. We're in the neural vertebral canal. I mean,
we're in the vertebral canal. So yeah, I don't see any lamina. I don't see any vertebral body. How
come? Well, look where the cut line is. Is it going through the vertebral body? No, it's going
through the canal. Going through the vertebral canal. Got it? See how that works? All right.
We can use, I said this is kind of not intuitive, but we could use the axial to put those same lateral
cuts. As long as we put a cut lateral to medial, lateral to medial to lateral through here,
doesn't matter. It's more intuitive to stand on the side and do it. It's a way to think about it.
But we could use the axial view. So this cut, if I pull this slice out, that's the slice that we see.
Okay, this looks like what, a four-level ACD off in this patient.
Let's see the unsanitary processes. There's our little dens right there. You got it?
All right. So I'm not going to make this right now. Maybe if I get some energy,
I'll show me going over an MRI later. I'll make another video on that. But I really think that
you have a really, if you've been through, if you made it this far, I think you have a really good
idea on how to read your cervical MRI at this point. So I hope you enjoyed this. Give me a
thumbs up. This was really hard making this. I spent like half of my vacation days making this for
you. But I, I mean, I enjoy this. I'm nerdy. I enjoy this stuff. So all right, we'll see you in the next video.
My name is Anthony Fogg, I'm an orthopedic surgeon. I was appointed as a consultant to
the Great Western Hospital in Swindon 24 years ago, primarily as a spinal surgeon. I also
perform regular joint arthroplasty of hip, knee, arthroscopy procedures on the knee and
was at one time a general surgeon but have now concentrated mainly in spinal surgery.
Spinal surgery is quite a complex subject as I'm sure you know. So what I tend to do is like
most surgeons I see people in outpatients assess their conditions by means of history
taking examination, specialist investigations which are provided here for me in the way of MRI
scans, x-rays and various other specialist medical investigations and try and choose those
patients who may benefit from my particular expertise in spinal surgery and for those who do
not refer them on to what I perceive to be the most appropriate alternative treatment management plan.
There are a number of typical patients in spinal surgery. The typical patient I would see who
I know I can do something for is the young patient who has suffered with sciatic pain in one or
other legs for more than three months. Which pain has been refractory to treatment by pills or
physiotherapy or injections or osteopathy and whom there is an obvious cause such as a disc
prolapse which I can then surgically remove and relieve the patients of their sciatica.
They normally are between the ages of 25 and 45.
The vast number of mass majority of patients suffering with what we call mechanical back
pain are attributable to combination of early degenerative changes that take place in the
lower lumbar discs, probably primarily as a consequence of a genetic predisposition to that.
They subsequently go on to develop pain from either the disc or indeed from the subsequent
arthritic changes in the joints at the back of the spine. They don't suffer with sciatica,
they have mechanical quite often intermittent back pain which they are not completely disabled by
but it interferes with considerable aspects of their life. Those patients would usually be
assessed in much the same way as all the other patients with MRI scans, quite often sent for
physiotherapy in the first instance. Where the pain is so severe that physiotherapists are unable
to break into the pain cycle we often refer them for targeted injections into the back either by
ourselves or by our consultant radiology colleagues. Very occasionally they are referred onto manual
practitioners such as osteopaths or chiropractors although in my particular practice that treatment
modality is usually provided by the physiotherapists. So physiotherapy and then an educational
rehabilitation of the patient so that they manage their own pain rather than being reliant on other
members of the fraternity to do it for them. In terms of coming to see me most patients obviously
are referred in by the general practitioner the GP being the first port of call in the primary care
sector for patients. They would tend to go and see their GP quite soon early on in the progression
of their illness particularly if they've got severe sciatic leg pains which can be very
disabling. The GPs or the ones who have experience of this will take note of the fact that we as
surgeons will tell them that 95% or more of patients with sciatica probably as a consequence of a
disc prolapse will actually recover spontaneously within a period of about three months during which
time they should be given appropriate analgesics anti-inflammatory medications. They should in
the first instance when the pain is severe rest unlike back pain it's the sciatica which
resolves with rest and then gradually over a period of time they can reintroduce themselves into
society work etc and by three months the vast majority have actually resolved or improved
to a point where they no longer need any intervention. If the pain persists certainly
beyond eight or ten weeks and it doesn't look like it's settling down that's the period at the time
at which we would advise GPs to send patients out. There's a slight difference in the private
sector as opposed to the NHS sector because the pressures in the private sector are nowhere
near as as high as they are in the NHS sector and patients tend to get sent and seen sooner.
Nonetheless we do not treat people differently we would still say there's a good chance and we
would try absolutely everything in order for them to avoid surgery believe it or not before
actually sending them off for an operation.
Well let's take a typical case again let's take the the younger person who's had a disc
prolapse who's suffered with severe sciatica which has prevented them from working has interfered
with all aspects of their domestic and social life they are frequently working they're not able
to work and in some instances their job and therefore their livelihoods are being threatened
they have mortgages so when you operate on them when they come into hospital they have a lot of
tension and a lot of stress it's not just the pain so they suffer and it is noticeable when you
actually do operate on these people most of whom will wake up the day after surgery in the morning
with no pain in their leg they are intensely relieved and a lot of them think they'll be able
to get over the surgery very quickly but it takes a lot longer because of the stress that's been
involved both physical and emotional stresses which they suffered so anything up to six weeks
after the surgery is what it takes for people to get back to some form of realistic living.
Are you suffering from a bulging disc and you're hoping for ways to help it get better
as quickly as possible? If you are, then this video is perfect for you. Hi everybody, my name
is Will Harlow and I'm the over 50s specialist physio, here at HT Physio in Farnham and today
we're going to be talking about seven common mistakes that people with disc bulges make
that stop their problem from healing as fast as it should. Now before we dive into the content
of today's video, if you haven't already, please like the video and subscribe to the channel because
then you'll be the first to hear about our new back pain sciatica and disc related videos as soon
as they come out. Now that that's been said, let's talk about disc bulges and the common mistakes
people make. Now disc bulges are super common injuries, they usually occur in the lower back
and they can cause problems like back pain and sciatica, which is pain down the back of the leg.
It can also cause pins and needles and numbness and in some cases,
weakness in the legs as well. If you want to have a quick look at the anatomy of what a disc bulge
looks like, so this is a cross section of the two lumbar vertebrae right at the bottom of the spine.
So you've got your two bones here and in the middle we have a disc. A disc is like a flexible
thing that allows us to bend and twist and in some cases when we bend, we can develop these
disc bulges which can come out of the back of the disc and in unlucky circumstances they can
sometimes press on a nerve which you can see there and that can cause pain in the leg like sciatica.
Now super common problems, lots of people get them, most people who get them won't actually have
any pain with them so they won't even know they're there but some unlucky people do get pain and for
those people it's really important to know how to help that problem get better as quickly as possible.
Now in my work as a sciatica specialist here in the clinic, I commonly see lots of mistakes people
making when they come to see me, things that I hadn't even considered that they're doing wrong
that stops it from getting better as quickly as possible. So let's talk about the seven most
common mistakes people make and how to avoid them. Now the first mistake people make with
a disc bulge that stops it from getting better as quickly as it should is not sitting properly.
Now when you have a disc bulge I'll use my spinal model to demonstrate here what usually is the
case for about 80-90% of people if they bend that makes the disc bulge feel worse. They won't
like bending forward to pick things up from the floor. If you've noticed that when you
bend your sciatica or back pain gets worse you fall into this category. Now what people don't
consider is that sitting which is the act of rounding the pelvis so you can sit on your
sitting bones looks a lot like bending. Okay so sitting and bending are pretty much the same
movement they both involve what we call spinal flexion which is putting that spine into a flexed
position. Now obviously we can't avoid sitting all together but we can avoid some types of sitting.
So the worst type of sitting when you have a disc bulge is slouched sitting. Okay this is where
my back is rounded I'm sunk back into the chair my chin's poking forward my bum is tucked underneath
me and my lower spine loses that natural C shape it goes into a curve. Now this puts all the pressure
on the front of the disc and forces the bulge out towards the back and at the back of the disc
we have the nerves. So if your disc bulge is coming out the back it's going to press on a nerve
and make the problem worse. So number one is don't slouch when you're sitting if you sit upright.
Number two to help you with this is to make sure you're not sitting on very soft seats. The softer
the seats are you sit on the more you sort of sink into them the worse that flexion becomes.
So sofas are not a great idea much better are hard chairs like dining room chairs with a nice firm
back and then the final piece of advice I have on this point is to exaggerate this natural
C shape in the lower spine that helps with the what we call re-centralizing of the disc bulge
and one fantastic way to do that is to get a rolled up towel like this one here and you have
it rolled up into a cylinder that kind of shape and you just put it at your lower back. So if I
was sitting on this chair I would have it sat back here like this so it pushes my back forward it
pushes my stomach forward and it helps the discs to stay as central as possible within the spine
and it can help with disc bulge here. So that's the first tip I have for you is to
make sure you're sitting properly. Now the second mistake that people with disc bulges make that
stops them from getting better as quickly as they should is they stop walking. Now for many people
who have a bulging disc walking becomes very painful it can make the back pain feel worse and
sometimes it can make the leg pain feel worse as well so they think well walking is painful so I
just will stop walking until this gets better. Now although this can sometimes help with the pain
if you stop walking it takes away one of the key stimuli that helps the disc get better. So to help
a disc get better the research shows we need to be doing weight bearing exercise like walking.
If we're not walking we're not sending signals to the right area of the body that healing needs to
occur and healing will slow down. The body won't expend energy on healing things that it thinks you
don't really need anymore okay and walking is a great way to send a signal to the spine that we
still need these discs and we're weight bearing through the spine we need a healthy spine. So if
we stop walking we take away that stimulus. Now if walking is very painful for you I'm not saying
you should just walk through the pain what you should do instead is you should choose very short
walking distances and make sure that you stop before the pain gets too bad find a place to
either stop and lean forward or to stretch backwards or do whatever makes you feel better
pause for a few minutes and then get started again. So don't stop walking you'll lose your
muscle strength you'll lose your core stability and you'll lose your spinal mobility if you do
so don't fall into the trap of thinking that stopping walking is a good idea. Now the third
mistake that people make when they have bulging discs and this is super common is they start stretching
their hamstrings. Now I made a video about this specifically you can see that in the top corner
of this video right now but basically when people have a disc bulge it often causes pain down the
back of the leg that we call sciatica and that can often feel like a tight hamstring. So what people
do is they think well it feels tight so I'll stretch it and that will make it better. Now the problem
is if you stretch a nerve it's not the same as stretching a muscle if you stretch a muscle that
usually helps it but if you stretch a nerve that will make it worse it will make the inflammation
around the irritated part of the nerve much much worse. So we definitely need to avoid stretching
the hamstrings. I would highly recommend my video that gives you all of the stretches you need to
avoid to make sure you're not stretching the hamstrings and not aggravating the nerve. The
common things people do is they lie on their back with their leg and they lift their leg up like this
that's a no-go they also stretch their leg out in front of them and they lean forward again that's
a no-go. Those are some quick sort of examples of hamstring stretches but my other video has more
details on that so don't stretch the hamstrings if you have bulging discs even if it feels like
it's the right thing to do. Now the fourth mistake that people with bulging discs make
is they don't drink enough water. Now staying hydrated is obviously general advice that everyone
gets from their doctor and we all kind of roll our eyes and think yeah yeah yeah we know we should
drink more water but when you have a bulging disc this becomes doubly as important. Now if you look
at my disc model again you can see that the disc in the middle of these vertebra is very flexible
so if something within the body is flexible it often means it's filled with fluid and fluid
obviously is made up predominantly of water so if you look at the research it shows that our discs
are about 95 percent water so they have a huge water content. Now the problem is when we become
dehydrated our body looks for areas inside the body with lots of water and it tries to draw water
away from them to give the additional water to our vital organs. It sees the discs and says
there's loads of water there let's divert that away from the discs and we can give it to other
parts of the body. Now when your discs are losing water they become flattened so they lose their
height and what that leads to is a worsening bulge so if you're dehydrated your disc bulge
will feel worse and it will also get better slower so make sure you're staying hydrated
drink at least 10-15 percent more water than you normally would when you're suffering with a bulging
disc and that should help you get better as quickly as possible. Now the fifth mistake that people
with bulging discs make is they take too much bed rest. Now in the 1980s this was the advice that
you get from your doctor if you had a bulging disc or sciatica they would say right six weeks of
bed rest and that should sort you out and for many people that did improve the pain but as soon
as they got up and started walking again they were weak they'd lost their core muscles they'd lost
their glute muscles and before long the sciatica came back worse about 10 times worse than they had
it before and this happened over and over and over. It wasn't until about the 1990s that we
started to change our advice and realised that bed rest is actually the worst thing you can do
for a bulging disc. Yes it might feel nice to lie down for a bit and yeah you should lie down if
you're in lots of pain but you shouldn't stay there any longer than you need to. The new research
shows that staying moving doing things as normally as you should as you as you can normally is the best
way to get it better as quickly as possible and if you're not exercising if you're not being active
if you're not going to work you are going to delay the recovery time for your bulging disc so it's
very important you don't take too much bed rest unless you need it for short periods. Now the sixth
and very very common mistake that people make when they have bulging discs is they persevere with
painful exercises. Now I see this one all the time people come to see me with a bulging disc and they
say will I've been doing these exercises on YouTube or I've been doing these exercises that another
physio gave me and they hurt like hell but I just keep persevering through but it's still not getting
better and the thing is a bulging disc and sciatica is not a game of no pain no gain. In fact if you
make the thing saura it's going to take longer to get better. Now a bulging disc is basically a
process of inflammation around the nerve root so when you have a disc bulge basically it's
pushing out the back like this it's touching the nerve root and in response to that the body pumps
a load of inflammatory chemicals around that area so we have a high level of inflammation in this
zone. Now if we're doing exercises that hurt the reason it's hurting is probably because it keeps
making that disc bulge come out and every time it comes out you get another boost of inflammatory
chemicals which we absolutely don't want. These inflammatory chemicals slow down healing they
make the pain feel worse they make you stiffer they make the muscles tighter they make the nerve
more irritated and it just becomes a horrible vicious circle. So the golden rule I have for
sciatica exercises is that they should not be painful and they definitely shouldn't make your
pain feel worse. So what we look for is exercises that aren't painful at the time exercises that
aren't painful in the hour afterwards and exercises that you feel significantly better after in the
24 hour period after you've done them. So that's the golden rule for finding the right sciatica
exercises and the biggest mistake people make is not listening to that they're making their problems
worse by choosing painful exercises. So the right exercises will be different for everyone but make
sure you avoid ones that hurt because that's one of the biggest mistakes you can make. Now the seventh
and final mistake that people with bulging discs make and this one might surprise you is they spend
too long obsessing over their MRI results. Now when you've had sciatica for a while it might be
tempting to go and get an MRI or you might have a doctor recommend you get an MRI scan and that
can be a good thing because it can show you that the diagnosis is correct it can show you what's
happening in the spine. Now the problem is an MRI scan is the most comprehensive imaging technique
we have it shows up absolutely everything in the spine. So for 99.9% of people the MRI results will
come back and show multiple problems at multiple layers in the spine. It might show a bulging or
a herniated disc on one level it might show degeneration of the facet joints on other levels
it might show that you've got a flattened disc on a different level it might even show a fracture
in the spine. Now this might surprise you but all of these results can also appear in a normal
healthy spine. There was research done by a group of researchers who scanned a thousand
people with no back pain and no sciatica and they found results like these on almost everybody
at least 90% of the people they scanned and this is people from the age of 20 up to the age of 80
they all had at least one thing on the MRI scan which looked abnormal. So just because you've seen
some you know things on the MRI report that look abnormal or they look like they should be the cause
of pain try not to fret over them because those things might have been there for a long time.
All the MRI scans should do for you is reassure you that the initial diagnosis is correct no matter
how bad it looks on the scan as long as there's nothing serious going on and your doctor will
be able to tell you if there is or there isn't. If they've said look this is happening and you
know it's just a case of persevering with what you're doing try not to obsess over what's going on
on there because it's a whatever it is it's probably very common in the general population
not just those with pain. Now the other thing we find is that sometimes people can have their
sciatica go away but the disc bulge looks the same on the MRI. We don't quite know how that happens
we know that the body is way more complex than we understand and we just try and fill in the gaps
where we can but don't obsess over what's on that scan even if it looks really scary. The analogy I
like to use is that when you put your back into an MRI scanner it's like taking your car into a
formula one garage. They're going to find problems with it but the car still works that's the same
as your spine the MRI scanner is going to find problems with it but your back still works fine
so if you persevere with the things that work you avoid the things that don't and you keep yourself
moving for 95 percent of people bulging discs and sciatica do get better within a reasonable
time frame. Now I've got other videos showing you more details about bulging discs how long they
take to get better and what you can expect. Most people can expect their bulging discs to get better
within about 12 weeks but some people it takes six months and that would cover the vast majority
of people. For five percent of people it goes on for longer and for those people they need more
intensive care. Some people need surgery but not many so don't worry if you're early in the stages
of having a bulging disc follow the advice that you get from your professional follow the advice
from sensible videos like this one and it'll give you the best chance of getting better. Anyway
that's all I've got for you today I hope that's been a useful video if you've enjoyed this video
please do pick up a copy of my book it's called Thriving Beyond 50 and it has loads more advice
about back pain bulging discs and sciatica within it. Anyway that's all I've got today
if you found this useful please leave a comment below and I look forward to speaking to you on the next one.
If you're suffering from a disc bulge that's giving you back pain and sciatica, the good news is there are usually ways you can speed up healing from this problem.
Hi everyone, my name is Will Harlow and I'm the Over 50s Specialist Physio, here at HT Physio in Farnham,
and today I'm going to be giving you eight ways that you can speed up your recovery from a disc bulge problem.
Now, disc bulges, sciatica, back pain, these are problems that I see all the time in the clinic.
It's one of the areas that I specialize in, I've done a lot of extra research, work and study in the area of sciatica and disc bulges,
and it's a really common problem.
We probably see people about four times a day, three or four times a day with this issue,
and the bad news is it can be one of the most painful conditions that we treat here.
Now what I'm talking about when I talk about a disc bulge is something to do with the spine,
and here we have a cross section of the two lowest vertebrae in the spine.
So we've got the two white things, which are the bones, we've got the disc in the middle,
you can see the joints at the back where the two vertebrae join, and in the middle we've got the spinal cord,
and these are what we call nerve roots.
Now a disc bulge looks something like that.
So we have a bulge where we get a weakness of the disc, the fluid center starts to push towards the back of the disc in certain positions,
and if we're not careful it can press on a nerve root, which looks kind of like that.
So you can see there that the nerve root is being pressed on.
Now disc bulges are really common, not everyone's disc bulge will press on a nerve root,
but when it does press on a nerve root we get lots of symptoms like pain all the way down the leg,
which we call sciatica, that pain can follow different patterns.
We also tend to get a seizing up of the lower back muscles, so we get back pain as well.
We can get pins and needles, we can get numbness, we can get weakness in the legs in more severe circumstances,
and a whole host of other symptoms as well.
All in all it's a very unpleasant problem, but the good news is 95% of people with this problem can get it better without surgery.
So in today's video now we know what a disc bulge is, we're going to talk about eight ways that you can speed up healing from a disc bulge,
so if you're suffering from a disc bulge or disc herniation you can get better quicker.
Now the first thing you need to do to speed up recovering from a disc bulge is to avoid any movements or positions that aggravate the problem.
Now one of the common mistakes that we find people make when they're suffering from a disc problem is that they think it's like other injuries where it's a bit of no pain, no gain.
So you know just push through the pain or do the things you normally do and just grit your teeth and bare it.
Now if you've got a disc bulge this is the worst thing you can do and the reason it's such a bad thing is because a lot of the pain associated with this problem is due to something called inflammation.
Now inflammation is where we get a load of angry chemicals which surround the disc bulge and almost attack the nerve and that causes the pain in the leg,
which is why some people with severe sciatica can have pain no matter what position they're in.
It's because the inflammation is still around the nerve root.
Now if we keep doing things that aggravate it what we're doing is we're making the inflammation in that area worse and if we're doing that we're delaying recovery from the problem.
So as a golden rule of exercises, positions, movements, anything you do when you've got a disc bulge it should be as close to pain free as possible.
And this is the most important factor to getting a disc bulge better as fast as possible.
Now the second thing you can do to speed up recovering from a disc bulge is to take a rolled up towel and to put it behind your lower back when you're sitting.
Now when I say a rolled up towel the type of thing I'm thinking about is this.
So all you need to do is get a normal shaped towel, normal sized towel I should say and roll it up into a cylinder and when you're sitting you put it at your lower back here.
Now what this does is something very important.
It does something called exaggerate the lordosis of the spine and the lordosis is the natural C shaped curve that we have in the lower part of our spine.
Now when we have a normal lordosis so when we have a normal C shape that has been shown through MRI studies to be more likely to push the disc back into the position it was designed to be in.
When we reverse the lordosis by sitting in a slump position or bending forward or do anything that takes us out of that natural C shape into a reverse C shape.
We are making the disc bulge worse and sitting is a big risk factor for making the disc bulges worse.
So if you do lots of sitting the best thing you can do is to make sure you have that C shape in the spine maintained.
So when you're sitting you should have something here just to push the spine forward a rolled up towel does the job perfectly and it will help that disc to move back to where it should be.
Now the third thing you should do to speed up recovery from a disc bulge and this is not just generic advice but it's to stay hydrated.
You might be thinking well surely stay hydrated that's just good advice for anything so it's pretty nonspecific but with disc bulges this is actually very relevant advice.
Now the discs themselves the spinal discs are made up of about 90 to 95% water.
This is quite a good model it shows how flexible the disc is.
So we have a tough load of outer fibers they are pretty well hydrated but in the middle we have almost pure liquid.
So the discs are very heavily hydrated when the body is hydrated as well.
Now the problem is if we become dehydrated the body senses that it needs to take water to help the running of the cells in other areas of the body.
So what does it do? It tries to draw in water from the non essential areas.
One of these areas is the discs.
So if you are dehydrated your body will try and suck water away from the discs to feed other areas of our anatomy more crucial to our survival.
And that will leave us with thinner discs that are a bit more compressed because they don't have the water weight to hold them up.
Now this causes a couple of different problems.
One of the problems is it can make inflammation worse and the other problem is that it closes down the spaces where the nerves run through in the spine.
So if your nerve is irritated and it's giving you sciatica that will get worse when you are dehydrated.
So one of the most important things you can do when you have sciatica and a disc bulge is to make sure you're drinking plenty of fluids.
Probably two to five hundred mils per day more than you normally do just to keep on top of your hydration.
Now the fourth thing you should do to speed up recovery from a disc bulge is when you feel able you should start gentle pain free active range of motion movements.
Now what do I mean by this?
Basically what I mean is any movement of your lumbar spine of your lower back that doesn't cause you pain is likely to be helpful in your healing.
So use pain as your guide.
And the reason we want to move the spine in a comfortable way so as not to cause pain is A.
Don't make the inflammation worse.
If it's comfortable it's probably not making inflammation worse.
And B. We're trying to bring blood flow to the disc to help it heal.
Now your blood flow is the life force of the body.
It's what nits things back together when we have an injury.
If we didn't have blood flow to an area it just wouldn't heal and the discs don't have a very good blood supply.
So we need to try and bring blood flow to the disc and the only way we can really do that is through movement.
Most people when they have sciatica they'll have a few movements that cause them more pain and they'll have a few movements that cause them less pain.
The movements that cause them less pain are the ones that should be done.
So these are the ones you should work on to slowly restore the mobility of your spine.
Now the fifth thing you should do to speed up recovery from a disc bulge is to do as much walking as you feel able.
Now walking has been shown to be one of the best exercises for recovery from back pain and sciatica and a disc bulge is no different.
Now it might initially be quite painful to walk but it doesn't mean you should stop altogether.
What you should do is you should split up the walking into very short durations of time that you can just about manage before the pain starts
and when it starts you should try and stop even if that means you're just doing a two minute walk around the house and then stopping.
That is so much better than doing nothing.
If you find that you feel better when you walk then you should try and maximise that so do as much walking as possible within reason.
If you find that you walk and it feels fine then you stop and the pain feels worse it means you've done too much.
So there will be a trial and error process when you're trying to find out how far you should walk.
So first of all start off by walking a sensible distance somewhere between five and 30 minutes depending on how much pain you're in.
Stop before you reach pain then take note of how you feel over the next 24 hours.
If you feel fine that distance was absolutely okay for you so you can either repeat it or you can do more.
If you felt worse afterwards you've done too much so you need to wind it back 5, 10, 15 minutes depending on where you started
and just start from a really low level and build up.
Overall walking is great because it improves blood flow to the disc, it improves movement of the spine
and it helps with the healing process of the disc as well.
Now the sixth thing you can do to improve recovery from a disc bulge is to be careful about your sleeping position.
Now if you are a back sleeper then one of the best things you can do is to take pressure off the nerve in the leg by putting a towel or a pillow underneath your knees.
So we want to be lying flat with a kink in the knees okay so we've got the towel just underneath the knees so they're slightly bent.
What this does is it takes pressure off the sciatic nerve and helps with healing.
Now if you sleep on your side which probably most people do, what we tend to find is people who sleep on their side have a leg that falls over the top of the other one
or falls behind the other one and either of these circumstances leads to the pelvis being twisted which is not ideal for 8 hours each night when you've got sciatica.
So instead what you need to do is put a pillow between your knees.
This keeps the knees apart which puts the pelvis in the right position and stops it from rotating left or right, forward or back and this can really speed up healing.
Now usually as well if you are a front sleeper we would say for most issues this is not a good thing but if you have a disc bulge sometimes front sleeping can actually be helpful.
So don't try and not sleep on your front if you find it comfortable at the moment then that is the place you should be.
Obviously it'd be something to try and wean yourself off of afterwards because it can cause other problems but front sleepers can sometimes be okay with sciatica as well.
Now the seventh thing you can do to speed up recovery from a disc bulge and this is a super important one is to avoid stretching the hamstrings.
Now the hamstrings are the muscles we have at the back of our thigh.
I'll show you them they're just here so they're at the back of the thigh between the buttock and the knee.
Okay and they are called hamstrings because they kind of feel like strings when you contract them because they've got nice long tendons.
Now when people have sciatica they often have pain at the back of the leg and it can sometimes feel like it's the hamstrings there's a sore.
Now the reality is it's not the hamstrings at all it's the nerve underneath the hamstrings but because it feels like the hamstrings some people try and stretch the hamstrings to relieve the pain.
Now this is a big mistake and it can make sciatica ten times worse it can even stop you from getting better.
Hamstring stretches involve things like lying on your back and lifting your leg up or sitting on the floor of your leg out in front and reaching for your toes.
All of these things stretch the hamstrings but they also stretch the sciatic nerve and if you've got a disc bulge and the nerve is being irritated it will not like to be stretched it will make the problem much much worse.
So the goal here is to not stretch the hamstrings at all even if they feel like they need to be stretched.
Now the eighth and the final thing you can do to improve the healing from a disc bulge instead of stretching the hamstrings is you can stretch the other muscles in the legs but sometimes it works best to actually stretch the muscles in the legs on the opposite side.
So let's say you've got pain in your right leg you've got sciatica in here you've got a right sided disc bulge.
Now some people find that even if they're not stretching the hamstrings stretching any muscle in this right leg is going to make their pain feel worse.
Now for those people one thing that I found to be super beneficial is to stop stretching the right side altogether and move all of your stretches over to the left side.
That means stretching the buttock, it means stretching the calf, it means stretching the quads.
I probably would still avoid stretching the hamstring on the left side just because of the position it puts the spine in.
But if you're doing stretches on the right leg and that's the painful leg it's not making it better try having a break from there and stretching the left side instead.
This can work wonders I have another video on this which I will leave a comment to in the show notes and it can show you one of the best ways that you can use this kind of stretching approach to improve healing from a disc bulge.
Anyway so those are all of the things you can do to speed up healing from a disc bulge.
I'm just going to run through them one more time.
So number one is to avoid anything that's aggravating the problem.
Number two is to use a rolled up towel behind your back when sitting.
Number three is to make sure you're staying hydrated.
Number four is to incorporate gentle pain-free movement of your lower back.
Number five is to make sure that you're doing as much walking as you can.
Number six is to make sure that you're putting yourself into a good sleeping position using the right pillows.
Number seven is to avoid hamstring stretches.
And number eight is to do your stretches on the opposite leg to the pain.
That's all I've got for you today. Thank you very much for watching.
If you've enjoyed this video you can get more from me by picking up a copy of my book.
It's called Thriving Beyond 50 and you can find it using the link below this video.
If you've enjoyed today please do subscribe to the channel and like this video because it helps me reach more people.
But that's all I've got. I hope you've enjoyed it and look forward to speaking to you on the next one.
Hi everyone Dr. Mike here. In this video we're going to take a look at the spinal cord. We're
going to do some labelling, so go through some anatomy, but also go through the function
of the spinal cord. So what does it do with sensory information coming in from the body
and what does it do with motor information coming out?
Alright first thing is, when we look at the spinal cord it begins just underneath the
brain stem. Now there's multiple segments of the spinal cord. We've got the cervical
area, cervical means neck, we've got the thoracic, we've got the lumbar, we have the sacral,
and we have the coxageal. These are the different segments going from top to bottom of the spinal
cord. Now each of them have spinal nerves associated with them. So these are nerves
that shoot out in a way, you'll come back in and there's one other side so they're paired.
So the cervical region has eight spinal nerve pairs, the thoracic has 12, the lumbar has
five, the sacral has five, and the coxageal has one spinal nerve pair. If you add them
all up that ends up being 31 pairs of spinal nerves going down your entire spinal cord.
Now what I've got here is a cross section of a spinal cord and so basically transverse
section we're looking into it, bird's eye view. You can see that you've got on either
side two nerve roots coming out of the spinal cord and it connects up to a single spinal
nerve. Now there's one there and one there and that is the spinal nerve pair. Like I
said there's 31 of these pairs. Now I've basically taken, because you can do a cross section
at the cervical, thoracic, or lumbar region and the spinal cord itself looks slightly
different. So I've amalgamated them and this is a generalized view of what a spinal cord
looks like so we can label and then talk about its function. All right, first point
I want to go through is this. When we have a look at this nerve here, this spinal nerve,
you can see that there's two that come into one. All right, there are only very specific
neurons that move through that spinal nerve and very specific neurons that move through
that spinal nerve. But before we go through that, we need to know of this spinal cord.
What's the front? What's the back? Well, firstly, this is the back. So we call this
dorsal, right? This is the dorsal region. This is the front. So we call this ventral.
Now I've orientated ourselves and we can say that this nerve at the back is called the
dorsal nerve root. So we can label that and we can call it the dorsal nerve root.
Dorsal nerve root. All right, now this dorsal nerve root carries very specific information,
carries sensory information. So what's sensory information? Information about touch,
information about pain or temperature or pressure, anything that's coming from our body that wants
to go up to the brain to let it know what's happening about the internal and external
environment. That's sensory information and every bit of sensory information that's going
to the brain is carried through the dorsal nerve root. So that means information's coming up here
like that and it goes to the dorsal nerve root. All right, you can see there's a bump here.
This bump is a ganglion and it actually houses the cell body of the sensory neuron.
Now, remember, you can have neurons that look like that, which is called unipolar,
where it's a cell body and axon and then the terminals, but you can also have what's called
multipolar neurons, where or bipolar neurons, where it looks like there's two axons coming
from the cell body. So sensory neurons are predominantly bipolar neurons. Now this information
that's coming in wants to now enter the spine of before I say that, let's label this. This is the
dorsal root ganglion.
And even though I said a ganglion or at least this ganglion houses the cell body of sensory neuron,
the general definition of a ganglion is any area that houses cell bodies of neurons outside of
the central nervous system. So here's the central nervous system, the spinal cord and brain, right?
This nerve root is outside of it, so it's called a ganglion because it's housing a cell body.
All right, this sensory bit of information wants to come into the spinal cord, ultimately wants
to get to the brain, but before it does that, it needs to jump into this part of the spinal cord.
Now, this butterfly shaped area or this H shaped area is all gray matter. Now gray matter is where
one neuron speaks to another neuron. This is where cell bodies in the spinal cord are housed
or where synapses are. Okay, so I'm going to write here gray matter.
This is where we have synapses. The white matter is all this area outside of it. Okay,
this is all white matter and they're simply the highways. All they're doing is carrying axons
that go up to the brain or axons that come down from the brain. So white matter
carry axons and they're the highways. That's how I like to think about it. All right,
so this bit of sensory information is coming in. It goes into the gray matter first. Now,
this bit of gray matter looks like a horn and it's at the back in the dorsal area,
so it's called the dorsal gray horn unsurprisingly. Dorsal gray horn and this dorsal gray horn is
going to have sensory information synapsing. Now, if it synapses or comes into the dorsal gray horn
in this area here, it's carrying cutaneous sensory information. So for example, information about
skin and organs. If a sensory neuron comes into this area here, it's also carrying information about
skin and organs, but also muscles as well. And if it carries information in to this area,
it's carrying information about proprioception. Now, your question may be what the hell is proprioception?
Proprioception is your body's ability to know where you are in your own space. I can close my eyes
and touch my nose. Now, I can't see my nose. I can't feel my nose on my face, but I know where it is.
And this is because you've got certain receptors in joints and in muscles that can tell your brain
how flexed or extended that joint is, therefore telling you where you are in your own space.
That's proprioception. Now, as this sensory information comes in and goes into the dorsal gray
horn into its particular area, which we call laminar, it needs to go up to the brain. So it
needs to jump into white matter and white matter because they carry the axons, they're the highways,
needs to go in and up. So if it's carrying information that's destined to the cortex of the
brain for you to be consciously aware of it, about touch, it's jumping in via
this area of white matter. This area of white matter, known as tracks, tracks go up,
tracks go down. That's T-R-A-C-T-S. This information that's going up to the brain,
right? This is carrying information about fine touch, fine touch, vibration,
and fine touch, vibration and proprioception. So if somebody was doing this and you wanted
to be aware of it, sensory neuron jumps into the dorsal gray horn, jumps into the white matter,
this particular pathway here, and goes up to the brain for you to be consciously aware. So this is
conscious. But what if it's unconscious information? What if your brain needs to know about it,
but you don't need to be consciously aware of it? You may be thinking, what scenario does this go?
Well, this is a lot of proprioception. So for example, you can stand on one foot and it's not
because you're consciously contracting and relaxing certain muscles, it's because your brain is doing
it from proprioceptive unconscious information going up and then a motor signal going down.
So what about unconscious proprioceptive information? Well, that's being sent up
via this area of white matter here. That's all going up via that area. And this is unconscious
proprioceptive information. Now this pathway here is called the dorsal column medial lemniscus
pathway. I've done an entire video on it, so check it out. This pathway here is called the
spinocerebellar pathway because it's going from the spine straight to the cerebellum. That's that
little brain that sits underneath your cerebrum. And the last bit of information that we want to
send to the brain is information about temperature and pain. Information about temperature and pain
comes up from that area of white matter. And this is sending information about temperature
and pain. So this is where all our sensory information travels up via the highways
of our white matter. It gets to the brain, you either become aware of it or you don't become
aware of it, but either way the information gets to the brain. This is sensory. So to summarize
sensory information with the spinal cord, a sensory neuron comes in via the dorsal nerve root.
Its cell body is located at the dorsal root ganglion. The sensory neuron needs to come into
the dorsal grey horn depending on what type of information. From there, it moves off to
certain regions of white matter depending on what type of information. If it's for fine touch or
vibration or proprioception, it goes up through the dorsal column medial lamniscus pathway.
If it's about unconscious proprioception, it's going to be the spinal
sorry, the spinal cerebellum pathway going to the cerebellum. If it's for pain and temperature,
it's going up via this pathway. And this is called the spinal phylamic pathway.
All right, now let's talk about motor signals. So a motor signal is going to be coming down
from the brain or brain stem, which means we need to start here. We started with information
coming in. Winners start with information coming from the brain going down. So the white matter
tracks. All right, if it's conscious information to tell your limbs to move, it is coming down
via these particular tracks here. So we're going to have information coming down from the brain.
It's conscious information and it's telling our limbs to move. Okay, coming down telling our limbs
to move. But what if we want to tell, so skeletal muscle, what if we want to tell
the skeletal muscle of our trunk to move? It's here, right there. So again, conscious still.
Limbs to move here, trunk to move here. Okay, these both are called the corticospinal
tracks. Corticospinal tracks from the cortex to the spine. Now, what if it's not conscious movement?
Okay, what if, for example, it's reflexive movement? What if you see a light and your head
turns reflexively, for example? What if you're climbing a tree and you reflexively grip
as you climb that tree? This type of information is going to be moving through
this area here and this area here. And again, this is information coming down and it's unconscious.
But the important thing here is that these unconscious tracks have multiple names,
reticular spinal, rubro spinal, tectospinal tracks. They're older tracks. That's for sure. All right,
once the motor signal comes down through these white matter tracks, they need to jump
into the gray matter. Now, the gray matter for motor movement is in that area there
and that area there. So that means the ventral gray horn, we have the dorsal gray horn here.
We've now got the ventral gray horn here.
Ventral gray horn here. This is where motor signals are synapsing. One neuron synapses with
another. Now, if it's for limbs, synapsing there. If it's for the trunk, it's synapsing there.
And the motor neuron is going to be coming out here, there. So what that means is
this nerve root has sensory information coming in and motor information coming out. So it's called
a mixed spinal nerve. All right, so we've done sensory in, we've done motor coming out. But
last thing is there's this little area here. This little area here is called the lateral gray horn.
And the lateral gray horn contains pre-synaptic,
sympathetic neuron bodies. So sympathetic neuron part of the autonomic nervous system,
fight or flight. This sends a signal, unconscious signal, automatic signal, to your heart,
to your digestive system, to your lungs, to the smooth muscle around your body. So all this unconscious
contraction of muscles and releasing of substances from glands coming from this area here. And this
will send a signal out, but it doesn't go through here. It goes through here. And this is called
the paravirtebral ganglion, also known as the spinal ganglia. And this goes up and down the
thoracic and lumbar region of your spinal cord. And that sends sympathetic signals out to your
organs. I've done a whole video on the sympathetic nervous system and talk about that. So feel free
to watch it. So overall, what's the take home message? All right, take home message is this.
You've got gray matter, white matter. Gray matter is where the neuron synapse. White matter
are simply the highways. All sensory information comes in through the dorsal nerve root at the back.
All motor information comes out the ventral nerve root at the front. That's called the dorsal gray
horn. That's called the ventral gray horn. That's called the lateral gray horn. Even though I've
drawn it up with motor on this side and sensory on this side, they're both on both sides. This is
just to make it a little bit neater. That's all different types of information are sent down
different highways. That makes sense. And they sign up in different areas that also make sense.
This is a quick summary of the spinal cord.
Hi Ninja Nerds, in this video we're going to talk about the gross anatomy of the spinal
cord and the spinal nerves.
Let's go ahead and get started.
Hi Ninja Nerds.
So what we have to do first is we have to talk about the spinal cord and its associated
spinal nerves.
Now before we do that I just want to make a little quick division over here.
You guys remember that the spinal cord and the brain are part of what nervous system?
Your central nervous system.
So if I were to say here central nervous system, if we were to break that up into two components,
what are the two components?
The upper part here is the brain and the bottom part here which we're going to focus on a
lot is our spinal cord.
So that's a part of our central nervous system.
But guess what?
The central nervous system is intimately connected with the peripheral nervous system.
That's what the part of the peripheral nervous system is, the spinal nerves.
So if you guys remember, the peripheral nervous system is composed of two components, a sensory
component and a motor component.
But both of the sensory and motor component, whether it be somatic or visceral, meaning
autonomic, they both are going to be involved in making up our spinal nerves.
We are literally talking about this spinal cord and spinal nerves as two different systems
but intimately connected with one another.
First thing that we have to understand with the spinal cord is where does it start?
Where does it end?
That's the basic anatomy.
So in order to do that, you guys know we have up here our brain.
So here's our cerebrum.
This whole bad boy up here is going to be the cerebrum.
Then from your cerebrum, what else do we have here?
We have our cerebellum here, right?
So the mini cerebrum.
Then here we have our brainstem.
So what is this?
I'm just going to annotate the brainstem.
What are the different components?
Midbrain, Pons, Medulla.
Now in this back part here, you have two little fosters, right?
What are those different fosters?
If you guys remember from our skull anatomy video, we have your anterior cranial fossa,
our middle cranial fossa, and our posterior cranial fossa, all this big here, this little
scoop here.
Something in this posterior cranial fossa is a big old hole in the skull.
What is that big hole in the skull called?
It's called the foramen magnum.
So this is that hole which we see the spinal cord exiting out of.
What is this hole here called?
It is called the foramen magnum.
Now the spinal cord exits out of the skull via the foramen magnum and it starts right
below that.
So what we say is we correlate the beginning of the spinal cord with this first vertebrae.
What is that first vertebrae?
Well, if you guys remember, what are the vertebrae in the neck call?
We call those cervical vertebrae.
So this first vertebrae here is C1, your first cervical vertebrae.
That's the start of the spinal cord.
It extends down all the way to about what vertebrae?
Well, here's the end.
Instead of counting every single vertebrae, what I'm going to do instead is I'm going
to be smart.
I'm going to start at my sacrum.
I know that right above, here's my sacrum, so this big bone here is called my sacrum.
If I go one up, I have L5, L4, L3, L2, L1.
Generally anywhere between L1 to L2 is about where the spinal cord terminates.
So we know the spinal cord starts at the level of C1.
We know it extends all the way to about L1, L2.
The next thing we need to know about the spinal cord here is that there's different segments.
There's different segments of the spinal cord.
What are the different segments?
Well, if you guys remember all the vertebrae, what are the different vertebrae?
Cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and then we have also arcoxics.
The segments of the spinal cord have those same names.
So here in green, what is this segment here called?
This is our cervical segment of the spinal cord.
So what is this green one here called?
This whole green section here is the cervical segment of the spinal cord.
Beautiful.
Pretty simple there.
Then the next segment here extending from this blue portion to this blue portion, what
is this guy?
This one right here is going to be our thoracic segment.
So this is our thoracic segment.
Beautiful.
Keep going down.
You guys already know this.
It's going to be pretty self-explanatory.
We got lumbar segment.
We have our lumbar segment.
And then after that, what is the next segment of the spinal cord?
And this purple color here, this is our sacral segment of the spinal cord.
And then last but not least, we have this small little orange section here that we're
going to represent as the coccygeal segment, the coccygeal segment of the spinal cord.
Now this is the respective aspects of the spinal cord, but remember that spinal cord
is a part of our central nervous system.
The nerves that are coming off the spinal cord and leaving, that's a part of our peripheral
nervous system.
So we should know that these are our spinal nerves.
So we talked about the segments of the spinal cord, which is a part of our central nervous
system.
Now let's talk about the spinal nerves coming off of the spinal cord, which is a part of
our peripheral nervous system.
These things coming out, moving between the vertebrae are called just spinal nerves.
How many spinal nerves are there in these different segments?
That's important.
Common questions come up.
Well in the cervical segment, there's a total of eight.
Now here's the big thing.
We're looking at a sagittal section.
We're only looking at one half.
So in this case, we'd be looking at like the left half.
There's also the right half.
So there's eight pairs.
So eight pairs of spinal nerves.
Okay, sweet.
Next thing, thoracic segment.
There's going to be 12 pairs of spinal nerves.
Okay, and then we keep going down.
What else do we have here?
We have the lumbar segment, lumbar segment.
How many spinal nerves are there?
Five.
We're going to make a little kind of easy way to remember all this in a second.
Five pairs of spinal nerves, sweet.
Sacral segment, five.
This is actually pretty self-explanatory, right?
We're going to get there in a second.
So again, we've got sacral segment.
This is going to be five pairs of spinal nerves.
And then last but not least here, we have our coxigial segment, and this only makes
up one pair of spinal nerves.
So this is one pair of spinal nerves.
Now let's add all that up, okay?
You have eight cervical pairs, 12 thoracic pairs, five lumbar, five sacral, one coxigial
pair.
That's eight plus 12 is 20, 20 plus five is 25, 25 plus another five is 30, 31.
Our total number of spinal nerves here is going to be a whopping 31 pairs of spinal nerves.
Beautiful.
Okay, easy way that I like to remember this is just, there's a little modification.
You can remember the number of spinal nerves based upon this little easy way based upon
the vertebrae.
You eat breakfast at seven, lunch at 12, dinner at five.
You have a big drink and a small dessert.
Now we said seven cervical vertebrae.
Well, why are there eight spinal nerves then?
Okay, because Zach, you said that it should kind of correlate.
Let me explain why here.
So now the reason why there's eight pairs of spinal nerves and not seven pairs based
upon the vertebrae is because the first cervical spinal nerve exits above its respective vertebrae.
So here's C1 vertebrae.
Look where the C1 spinal nerve is.
It's above it.
Here's your C1 spinal nerve, then C2, C3, C4, C5, C6, C7, C8.
Now if we go down the corresponding vertebrae here, here's where it's just a little bit
different as we move our way down.
Here's C2, C3, C4, C5, C6, C7 vertebrae.
Here's T1 vertebrae.
The eighth cervical spinal nerve actually moves above the T1 vertebrae.
Then look what happens as we move into the thoracic segment and down.
It's all the same.
From the point starting at the thoracic segment, the thoracic spinal nerves and all the other
associated ones, where does it move?
Here's your T1 spinal nerve.
What is it moving with respect to its corresponding vertebrae?
It's moving below its corresponding vertebrae.
So the cervical segment is the only segment where the spinal nerves are moving above their
vertebrae.
Moving in from the thoracic spinal nerves down, those spinal nerves are moving below
their corresponding vertebrae.
That's why there's eight cervical spinal nerves.
That's that one modification.
So eight pairs of spinal nerves, 12, that should make sense because there's 12 vertebrae.
Five lumbar vertebrae, five pairs of spinal nerves.
Now I said that there's one sacral vertebrae or one sacral bone.
Embryologically, this sacrum, actually, if you kind of looked at it here, if you kind
of looked at the sacrum here, it used to be five individual bones, embryologically, that
fuse together.
So technically, if we look at this one bone, we have one, two, three, four, five individual
bones, they all fuse together.
And these little fusing points, when you look at the bone, is called your transverse ridges.
So again, embryologically, there is one bone, but it was five individual bones.
So that's why you have five pairs of spinal nerves coming from the sacral segment.
Okay, beautiful.
So now we understand the cervical segments of the spinal cord.
We understand, I'm sorry, we understand the segments of the spinal cord.
We understand their corresponding spinal nerves.
Next thing we need to know is two other anatomical terms.
So if you look here at the bottom of the spinal cord, here at the bottom of the spinal cord,
where we said it ended around L1, L2, there's a special name for the end of the spinal cord
because it comes to kind of a pointy edge.
That point there, this part here, is called your conus medullaris, your conus medullaris.
And again, that's usually around L1, maybe L2, where the spinal cord ends.
The next thing here is, if you take and wrap around, okay, all these nerves, these spinal
nerves that are coming off of the spinal cord, around the end of the spinal cord, technically
from L2, all the way to coccidio 1, this whole bundle of spinal nerves coming off the end
of the spinal cord, that has a special name.
That's called the cota equina, it's called the cota equina.
Let me explain where they got that kind of term from.
If you imagine here, we're looking at the back, looking at the dorsal aspect of the
spinal cord.
Here's our dorsal aspect of the spinal cord, okay?
Here is our conus medullaris, okay?
If you look at this, coming off of the end of the spinal cord is all of those spinal
nerves, from what points?
The points here for the cota equina are from generally L2 to the coccidio 1 spinal nerves.
All of these spinal nerves that are coming off that end, that is your cota equina, okay?
So that's where, cota equina is actually means horsetail, so cota means tail, equina
means horse, so it's horsetail, kind of looks like a horsetail from that view, okay?
So we now know the divisions of the nervous system, we know what makes up the central
nervous system component here, which is our spinal cord, and the spinal nerves are going
to be a part of that peripheral nervous system.
We know the basic segments, two more things that we have to talk about here.
You see how there's some bulbous portions here in the spinal cord?
You see right here we have this bulbous portion here, and this bulbous portion here.
This one's primarily in the cervical region, and it's enlarged, so we call this bulbous
portion here.
This here we call the cervical enlargement, it's called the cervical enlargement.
Now the cervical enlargement, technically from the spinal cord segment, it extends
from about C5 to T1.
There's obviously a reason that we should know the cervical enlargement.
It's enlarged or bulbous because it has more gray matter within those ventral horns of
the spinal cord, and we'll talk about what they are.
For right now, I just want you to associate ventral gray horn with skeletal muscles.
So they supply the skeletal muscles.
Since this is in the upper aspect of the spinal cord, these will be going to the skeletal
muscles of your upper limbs.
That's why it's more bulbous there.
So this is associated with upper limb muscles.
Okay, beautiful.
Then you come down here, we have another bulbous segment.
That's what that bulbous segment is called, and it's in the lumbar kind of region here.
This is called our lumbar enlargement, and the lumbar enlargement is actually going to
extend from spinal cord part L2 down to about S3 spinal cord segment.
This is bulbous for the same reason.
It has a lot of ventral gray matter, that ventral gray horn has a lot more gray matter.
The ventral gray horn is associated with skeletal muscles of the lower limbs.
That's why it's more bulbous in that portion.
So it's associated with lower limb muscles.
Okay, beautiful.
Now that we understand that, we can move on here to taking cross sections.
We understand kind of the basic overview of this kind of spinal cord and spinal nerves.
Now what we're going to do is we're going to take cross sections at each one of these
segments, look at them and understand some basic anatomy.
Then what we'll do is, is we'll kind of look at the spinal nerves and look at their anatomy.
Okay, so let's go ahead and start over here.
All right, so we talked about the segments of the spinal cord.
We talked about the basic concepts of the spinal nerves.
Now what I want to do is I want to take cross sections at each one of those segments of the
spinal cord and just go over a specific relationship that you have to understand.
Let's see that we take a look at the cross sections all here, right?
There's one, there's two relationships I want you to understand as we descend from cervical
to coccygeal.
One of the things I want us to understand is what is happening to the white matter.
So we're going to write here white matter, okay?
What is happening to the white matter as we go down from cervical to coccygeal?
The second thing I want us to look at here is what is happening to the gray matter as
we move from that cervical portion of the spinal cord down to the coccygeal segment.
I'm going to already tell you what the difference is and then we're going to make sense of why
there is that difference.
The white matter as you go, so again here we're going to go from cervical down to the
coccygeal segments.
As we work our way down, the white matter here is going to decrease.
So there's going to be decreasing white matter and we'll explain why.
And the same concept here with the gray matter as you go from the cervical segment of the
spinal cord down to the coccygeal segment, the gray matter is going to increase, there's
going to be an increase in this gray matter, beautiful.
Okay, let's explain why.
Let's start with the white matter and the gray matter will kind of work itself out through
that explanation.
Here's what I want you to remember, white matter, what is it carrying?
It's carrying information that goes up, ascending information, sensory information, and it's
also going to carry descending information down, which could be motor information.
Let's explain why those ascending and descending information is higher up in the cervical and
less of it is here in the coccygeal.
Let's use an example here.
Here we have the coccygeal segment, right?
We're going to have here picking up some sensory information from the coccygeal segment, okay?
Which is, you know, if we're saying that's usually near the coccyx, the tailbone, right?
Here it's going to have the sensory information move in here, right?
And whenever the information from the coccygeal segment moves in here, it goes to the most
medial aspect here.
So the most medial aspect, here's our kind of like midline portion here in this dorsal
column, and then it comes up, right?
So it's going to ascend all the way up here through all the portions of the spinal cord
as we're going up, right?
And this is eventually going to send sensory information up to your cortex.
Same thing here at the sacral division.
It's the same concept.
I'm going to take that sensory information maybe from, you know, the actual genital area
or the perennial area, and I'm going to take that sensation and I'm going to send that
into my area here, the spinal cord, and it's going to move just a little bit laterally
here, and then it's going to ascend upwards through all these different spinal cord segments,
working its way to the cortex.
And you guys already get the point here.
Same thing with the lumbar.
It's going to take its information in here, move just a little bit laterally to that segment
and continue to ascend.
And then thoracic here, it's going to take its portion here, the sensory information
here, from maybe from the trunk, take that sensory information here, move a little bit
laterally and then ascend.
And then finally, you're going to pick up sensations from maybe from the upper limbs,
from the neck, that's going to move in here and then ascend upwards.
What's happening to the sensory information, okay, these ascending tracks as we go up,
they're getting thicker.
You're taking more sensory information up as you ascend.
That is one of the reasons why the white matter is going to be a lot thicker.
It's the same concept with the descending pathways.
As motor pathways are going down, it's just flipped.
If you look here, the cervical, it would be going down here.
Same thing, it would continue, right?
So the cervical would come here, and then it would exit out, right?
But all the other fibers would also continue.
So you would also have the thoracic fibers coming here, and it would continue here.
And then eventually what will happen, it'll exit out.
You would have the same concept here if we followed the next one, which is the lumbar.
It's going to move a little bit more laterally here, and it's going to come down, it's going
to continue, and then it's going to exit out.
And if we were to continue, we'll do one more just for the sake of it, but the whole
concept is the same.
You have descending motor information coming here, it's going to continue down, continue
down here, and then obviously come to the sacral portion here, and then exit out.
The whole concept is that the descending pathways, there's more of them in the cervical region,
and more ascending information in the cervical region than as we go lower.
The concept is straightforward.
The other thing is the gray matter.
There's going to be less white matter as you go down, so the gray matter is going to occupy
more space.
So think about the mass of the muscles in the lower extremity, they're bigger.
So you've got bigger muscles down there, fatter muscles, you're going to need more
motor supply from that ventral gray horn.
That's why the gray matter is a little bit bigger as you go lower.
So that describes the relationship here.
Now that we described the relationship of these cross sections, now let's move over
here and talk about some basic anatomy of these cross sections.
All right, so now what we're going to do is we're going to take a look at these cross
sections and just describe some of the basic anatomy of this spinal cord cross section.
So first thing we have to talk about is some basic concept here.
You see how all of this portion of the spinal cord is this dark black color?
There's a reason why.
This dark black color of the spinal cord is called our gray matter.
It's called our gray matter.
And then all of this white spots here, this is called our white matter.
Now we have to have a basic histological understanding of what in the heck is the difference between
gray matter and white matter.
Let's come over here to this neuron because it's very important.
So when we talk about the structure or the kind of anatomy of a neuron, there's pretty
much just two real components.
Okay, technically you could say three, but we're just going to focus on two components.
One component of the neuron is just going to be this big structure here called our cell
body.
Okay, so there's two components of this.
This is going to be our cell body, which is this big structure here.
And then you're also going to have these little things coming off of the cell body.
What are these called?
These are called your dendrites.
Okay, they're little extensions that are receiving signals from maybe other neurons.
Then you're going to have this portion of the actual neuron coming from the cell body
down to this little terminal bulb here.
This right here is called your axon.
So from this here all the way to this here is your axon.
And then there's these little fatty sheets, these little lipid protein fat sheets that
are surrounding the axon that insulate it and allow for conduction of these action
potentials down the neuron.
What are these bad boys?
These are called your myelin sheets.
And these are basically lipid and fatty protein content.
And they're actually formed by specific types of cells.
You guys know, if we talk about the structures that myelinate axons and the CNS were referring
to the oligo dendrocytes, they're the ones that form that myelin that wrap around the
neurons.
If we're talking about the myelin sheets formed by, formed around neurons in the peripheral
nervous system, we're talking about the Schwann cells.
Okay, now that we've covered the basic anatomy here, okay, of the neuron, what I want you
to remember is that the myelin sheet gives off kind of a whitish more appearance to the
neuron.
So because of that, this entire axon because of the myelin sheets, this is referred to as
our white matter.
And then the cell body and dendrites, which are not myelinated make up our gray matter.
Pretty straightforward concept, beautiful, done.
Now let's talk about some other components here of this spinal cord.
What are some of the anatomical names for all of this stuff?
So pretty straightforward, this is our gray matter right here, right?
And it forms horns in the back, forms horns in the front, and then a little horn here.
Okay, this horn here in the posterior portion, how do I know it's the posterior portion?
Because this little line right here, there's a name for this.
This is called our posterior median sulcus.
Okay?
And this gray horn pointing towards the posterior end is called our posterior gray horn, pretty
original, right?
So it's called our posterior gray horn.
Then this horn here, which is going to be in the anterior surface, how do I know it's
anterior?
Well, this whole, this little fissure here, this is called our anterior median fissure.
And so this gray matter here in the anterior ventral surface here is called our anterior
or ventral gray horn.
Beautiful.
Okay, then we have white columns, okay, you see all these white columns?
Their white columns are named based upon their position with respect to the gray matter.
So look at this white column, it's posterior to the gray matter.
So we call this our posterior white column, or another better name for it is we call it
the dorsal white column.
But you know they give special names to this white columns.
Instead of calling them white columns, we call them the dorsal finiculus.
Then this is the lateral white column because it's on the lateral sides of the gray matter.
This is our lateral finiculus.
And the last one here is this guy here.
These are ventral, this white column is ventral to the, what, to the gray matter.
So this right here is called our ventral finiculus.
Okay, one more structure here.
You see these little bulbs here that are coming off the sides here, they're in between the
posterior gray horn and the ventral gray horn.
These are called your lateral gray horns.
We're going to write this over here because I want to make a note about it.
So again, these things here on the side are called your lateral gray horn.
There's a reason why I want us to know this.
This lateral gray horn is only found in one specific place in the spinal cord and it's
found between T1 to L2.
This is basically where you have two different things.
The lateral gray horn is only present in T1 to L2 and it consists of the preganglionic
motor neurons of the sympathetic nervous system.
That's what I want you to know with respect to the lateral gray horn.
It is only present in T1 to L2 which contains preganglionic motor neurons of the sympathetic
nervous system.
Beautiful.
We covered the basic anatomy here.
Now let's go down and talk about the basic function of these different structures here.
It's going to be very straightforward, very basic.
In your posterior gray horn, since we covered that first, I'm going to shade this in red.
The reason why I'm going to shade this in red here is that this posterior gray horn
is responsible for containing sensory neurons.
That's all I want you to know.
When someone says, what do you associate with posterior gray horn?
I want you to say sensory neurons are associated with the posterior gray horn.
I'm going to shade in this ventral gray horn.
This ventral gray horn here is going to be containing what?
It's going to be containing neurons for the motor system.
This is going to be containing motor neurons.
Motor neurons.
If you really want to be specific, this is technically more of these somatic motor neurons.
We'll put here ventral gray horn as technically somatic motor neurons.
We already talked about what's in that lateral gray horn, which is the motor neurons of the
sympathetic nervous system.
The next thing is we have all these white columns.
These white columns are containing things like tracks.
We'll basically describe what a track is, but that's sending sensory information, containing
axon-syncing sensory information up to the brain.
Same thing in these lateral and ventral white columns, you can have both ascending and descending
tracks.
We'll talk about this in more detail when we talk about white matter of the spinal cord.
For right now, all I want you to know is that their job, the white columns, is to send sensory
information up and to send descending motor information down.
That's all I want you to know.
That covers the basic aspect there.
Now, what I want you to also realize is that we give special names to these neurons.
What's in that?
It's the cell bodies and dendrites in this gray matter.
We call that bundle of cell bodies here in the central nervous system, these cell bodies
here.
We call these a group of cell bodies, so cell bodies, a bunch of them, and the CNS is called
a nucleus.
The same thing, these are the axons within that white matter.
They're sending sensory information up or descending information down.
A bundle of these axons in the central nervous system is called a tract.
Again, a bundle of axons, axon bundles in CNS is referred to as a tract.
Beautiful.
That's all I want you guys to know here for right now.
Now let's discuss, since we talked about the spinal cord, let's talk about some of
the spinal nerve.
Now what I want to do is basically talk about the basic anatomy of the spinal nerve now.
We talked a lot about that spinal cord.
Let's talk about that spinal nerve now and their components.
Basically, you have, again, you had all that dorsal or posterior gray horn here, ventral
gray horn here.
We already know that and you have your white columns.
Coming off the posterior portion of the spinal cord, you have this structure here.
What is this called?
This is referred to as your dorsal root.
It's actually made up of little rootlets that come together to make the root, but for
the most part dorsal root.
This part here in the front, coming off the ventral portion of the spinal cord, this is
called our ventral root.
Pretty self-explanatory, right?
The ventral root and the dorsal root come together.
When they come together, they form this component here.
You see how this one comes together here and this one comes together here.
When they come together and fuse, they make another structure here called a spinal nerve.
Beautiful.
Then the last two components here is that this spinal nerve can actually split off and
it can form one that goes on the back part, so in the back and in the neck.
That's called your dorsal rami of your spinal nerve.
There's another one that moves ventrally, supplying more of the anterior lateral surface
and your limbs, and that is going to be your ventral rami.
We're not going to talk about, there is some other structures here.
I'm just going to quickly draw them in, but we need to discuss these in more detail in
our video on the autonomic nervous system, so if you want to go and look at that anatomy,
go watch our video there.
Coming off the ventral rami, you also have these little things called white rami communicants
and gray rami communicants.
They're basically connected to what's called a ganglia, and a ganglia, by definition, is
a group of cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system.
Again, you want to know more about that, go watch our video on the autonomic nervous system.
We know the basic anatomy of the spinal nerve and basically all these components of it.
Next thing I want to do is discuss the basic function of the spinal nerve, so let's come
over here.
We have a patch of skin here, a patch of skin, and this patch of skin is going to be, let's
say, damaged for some reason.
There's going to be injury to that skin, maybe it burned it on something.
There's little nerves, there's little receptors that can pick up whenever there's damage
to the skin there, or irritation to the skin, and send that information down a neuron, the
axons of a specific sensory type of neuron.
That sensory neuron then can either, depending upon where the injury is.
You guys remember here, dorsal ramie supplies the back and the neck, and it supplies the
skin of the back, the skin of the neck, the muscles of the back, the muscles of the neck,
things like that, and it even can supply some of the vertebrae as well, whereas the ventral
ramie supplies the anterior trunk, even a little bit of lateral trunk, so lateral trunk,
and it also supplies the limbs, both upper limbs and lower limbs.
For example, if we're just saying whatever, this is going to be taking sensory information
for maybe the skin of the back and the neck.
The whole point here is I want you to get is that it's a sensory information.
It can come through the dorsal ramie, or it could come through the ventral ramie.
Let's just, for the heck of it, we'll show that.
Sensory information could come also via the ventral ramie.
The sensory information moving through the ventral ramie and the dorsal ramie will also
move through the spinal nerve, and then from that spinal nerve, it'll start moving towards
the dorsal root, not the ventral root.
You have to remember that, dorsal root.
Then what happens is this sensory neuron has what's called this little cell body here,
and it's called, remember what cell bodies, a group of cell bodies in the peripheral nervous
system is called?
It's called a ganglia, and this thing right here is a special type of ganglia.
We call this ganglia our dorsal root because it's in the dorsal root, ganglia.
Pretty original, right?
Okay.
It sends its central branch into the dorsal gray horn, where it'll synapse on some of
those cell bodies here in the posterior gray horn, which are associated with sensory neurons.
Then through some interneuron pathways, it'll activate motor neurons, in this case somatic
motor neurons, cell bodies of somatic motor neurons, present in the ventral gray horn,
which will travel through the ventral root.
From the ventral root, it can move through that spinal nerve, and guess where it can
go?
It can go through either the dorsal ramie, but wants to go to some of the muscles of
the back and the neck, or in this case, we can send it through the ventral ramie, where
it can go to the muscles on the anterior lateral surface of the trunk, as well as the limbs
itself.
Okay?
So, what I want you to know is that the spinal nerve contains mixed fibers of both motor
and sensory fibers.
This basically describes the basic anatomy and function of the spinal cord and spinal
nerves.
All right, engineers.
So, in this video, we talk about the gross anatomy of the spinal cord and the spinal
nerves.
I hope this video made sense.
I hope you guys enjoyed it.
If you guys did, hit that like button, comment down in the comment section.
Please subscribe.
Also, down in the description box, we'll have links to our Facebook, Instagram, Patreon,
and the link out.
You guys want to go check that out.
We truly appreciate it.
As always, engineers, until next time.
Now in this video we're going to go through the spinal nerves.
So very quickly I want you to remember that the peripheral nervous system, meaning the
nervous system that comprises of all the nerves that come out and away from the brain
and the spine, and all the nerves that come back in towards the brain and the spine, that's
what we refer to as the peripheral nervous system.
Which again means that you can have nerves that come from the brain and to the brain,
and nerves that come from the spine and to the spine.
And today we're just going to talk about those nerves that come into and out of the
spine, and we call those spinal nerves.
So if we were to have a quick look, I've drawn up the spinal cord here, and what I've done
is I've drawn every single spinal nerve that comes out and in to the spine, and what you'll
find is that there are 31 pairs.
Now I've just drawn one side, but you can picture this as being mirror imaged on the
other side.
If we break this up, we can break it up similarly to how we do when we look at the vertebrae
of the spine.
So remember you have cervical vertebrae, thoracic vertebrae, lumbar vertebrae, sacral vertebrae,
and coxageal vertebrae?
Well it's the same when we look at the spinal nerves.
Now there's only one small difference.
So remember when I told you how do you remember the numbers of vertebrae associated with each
particular region?
I said remember the times in which old people tend to eat, what times do old people tend
to eat?
They tend to eat at 7am, 12pm, and 5pm, 7am, 12pm, 5pm, which means that there are seven
cervical vertebrae, there are 12 thoracic vertebrae, and there are five lumbar vertebrae,
and the sacral and coxageal vertebrae, well they are individually fused together.
So don't worry about that.
So when we translate that to the spinal nerves, 7, 12, and 5, well it's exactly the same except
there's one difference.
Instead of there being seven cervical nerves, there are eight.
And the only reason why that's the case is if you think about having 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7 cervical vertebrae, if we have a look at the cervical nerves, one comes at the top
and then the rest come out underneath.
So if you would account that, you have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 cervical nerves, even though
you only have seven cervical vertebrae.
Now when we look at the remaining, so when we look at the thoracic vertebrae, there are
12, and there are also 12 thoracic nerves.
When we look at the lumbar vertebrae, well there's only five and there's also five spinal
nerves.
So the only difference you need to remember is that of the cervical nerves.
Alright, now that we've stated that and you can see I've summarized it here on the left
hand side, what I want to go through is the different spinal nerves and where they innovate,
so where they go to, and also something called a plexus.
Now some of these spinal nerves, when we look at them, when they come out and away from
the spine, they actually come together and form a bundle.
And this bundle will branch out again at some point, and what we call that is a plexus.
So a plexus is a bundle of nerves that will branch back out again.
So I want to show you the four main plexuses of the spinal cord, and yes that's the plural
of plexus, it's plexuses.
Let's have a look.
So the first plexus that you need to know is what we call the cervical plexus.
That's the cervical plexus, which is made up of the cervical nerve C1 down to C4.
So these nerves here, C1 to C4, they branch out of the spine and then they come together
to form a bundle, and like I said this bundle will branch back out again.
Now what do we call this bundle?
We call this bundle the cervical plexus.
Now the cervical plexus needs to go somewhere, needs to innovate some part of the body.
Now the place that this innovates is the back of the head, the neck, the shoulders, and
also the main one that I want you to remember, the diaphragm.
Now there's a number of different nerves associated with the cervical plexus as you can see,
but there's only one that I want you to remember.
The nerve that I want you to remember that's associated with the cervical plexus is that
nerve that innovates the diaphragm.
And that nerve is called the phrenic nerve.
The phrenic nerve innovates the diaphragm.
Now why is this important clinically?
Well think about individuals who have been in let's say some sort of motor vehicle accident
in which they may have severed their spine or a particular portion may have had a hemi
lesion of the spine.
Somewhere in C1 to C5 this may affect their ability to breathe because it may damage that
phrenic nerve.
And that phrenic nerve innovates the diaphragm which you know is a muscle that is the barrier
between the thoracic cavity and the abdominal cavity.
And this diaphragm is in a dome shape and when you innovate it until it's a contract
it contracts downwards and you breathe in.
So if that nerve's damaged it's going to affect breathing.
Okay what's the next plexus I want to talk about?
The next plexus is what the one that we call the brachial plexus and the brachial plexus
is C5 to T1.
That's the brachial plexus which means that cervical nerve 5, 6, 7, 8 and thoracic nerve
1 come together again to form a bundle and we call this bundle the brachial plexus.
Now this brachial plexus where does that innovate?
Well what's brachial mean?
Brachial means arm.
Remember that's the region that the brachial refers to.
So these nerves innovate the arm.
Let's write that down.
Innovate the arm and what's the nerves that I want you to remember?
Well the nerves that I want you to remember there's three of them.
I want you to remember the radial nerve, the ulnar nerve and the median nerve.
The radial nerve, the ulnar nerve and the median nerve should be pretty easy to remember
because if you have your arm down like this you know that you have the radial bone, the
radius.
That's the one closest to the thumb.
How do I remember that?
Your thumb can move in a circle in a radius therefore the bone closest to that is going
to be called the radius and the ulnar bone which is on the other side.
Therefore the radial nerve is the nerve closest to the radial bone, the radius.
The ulnar nerve is that closest to the ulnar and the median nerve is the nerve that goes
down the middle.
So you need to remember those three nerves.
Clinically what is their importance?
Let's talk about the radial nerve.
There is something called Saturday night palsy which you may or may not have heard.
Some people go out, have a few drinks, get a little bit pissy, come home and fall asleep
on the couch with their arm hanging over the edge of the couch.
What this does is it impinges the radial nerve.
It impinges on that nerve and what that does is while the person wakes up with a dead arm
and that's what we call Saturday night palsy.
What about the ulnar nerve?
Have you ever hit what we call the funny bone and get that tingling sensation down your
arm?
Well that's when you hit that ulnar nerve.
And what about the median nerve?
Have you heard of something called carpal tunnel or carpal tunnel syndrome?
This is where individuals have difficulty with moving, opening and closing their hand
and that's because that median nerve that goes down the middle actually goes in and
innervates some of the fingers of the hand by going underneath the ligament and this
ligament is called the carpal ligament and it forms like a tunnel.
So that median nerve has to go through that carpal tunnel and therefore if something happens
with that nerve and let's just say there's some damage to it or it tightens up a little
bit what's going to impinge on the median nerve and that's going to affect one's ability
to use their hand and that's carpal tunnel syndrome.
So there are the three nerves of the brachial plexus that I want you to remember.
What's the next plexus that I want to go through?
The next plexus we call the lumbar plexus and the lumbar plexus is L1 to L4 which again
means that lumbar nerve 1, lumbar nerve 2, lumbar nerve 3 and lumbar nerve 4 come together
form a bundle which again branch out again and we call that the lumbar plexus.
The lumbar plexus will innovate the anterior aspect of the thigh, the medial aspect of
the thigh and the lateral aspect of the thigh which is the front and the sides.
So let's write that down, the lumbar plexus, the anterior, medial and lateral aspects of
the thigh.
What's the one nerve I want you to remember for the lumbar plexus?
This is the femoral nerve, femoral nerve.
So if you were to have some sort of bulging disc at L2 for example, this may again impinge
on some of these nerves here, L2 for example and what that's going to do is affect the
innovation down to the thigh and alter, possibly alter one's ability to walk and that's what
we call an alteration in gait, G-A-I-T, gait, that's a way somebody moves.
So that's the lumbar plexus, the final plexus I want to go through we call surprisingly
the sacral plexus and the sacral plexus goes from L4 to S4 which means that we have lumbar
nerve 4, 5, sacral nerve 1, sacral nerve 2, sacral nerve 3, sacral nerve 4 again coming
together, form a bundle which again branches out again and we call that the sacral plexus.
Now where does the sacral plexus innovate?
First I want you to remember the lumbar plexus was the front and sides of the thigh, so what's
left?
The back of the thigh, the posterior aspect, so the sacral plexus will innovate the back
of the thigh, so let's write that down, posterior thigh and everything, it innovates everything
below the knee, okay, so let's write below knee, now everything below the knee that's
a lot right, so the nerve that you need to remember is what we call and I'm sure you've
heard it before the sciatic nerve and the sciatic nerve, well think about what if you
had sciatica, have you heard of sciatica before, so some issue with the sciatic nerve, what
happens?
Well people get immense amounts of pain going from their butt down through the back of their
thigh and into their leg and sometimes this will stop an individual from being able to
use their leg properly and their foot tends to drop and that's just called foot drop,
okay and that's what happens if there's damage to this sciatic nerve or some part of this
sacral plexus, so you can see the four plexuses of the spinal cord, the cervical plexus, the
brachial plexus, the lumbar plexus and the sacral plexus, I've told you where it innovates
and I've told you the main nerves that I want you to remember for each of these plexuses.
Now you're hopefully asking the question or thinking why is there a plexus at the thoracic
region and the answer to that is think about where would these nerves, nerves of the thoracic
region, where would they innovate?
Well they would wrap around and innovate the ribs, so they would go through and innovate
the intercostal muscles and they would innovate the lower aspect of the abdomen, okay, so
the thoracic nerves basically they come out and they innovate the intercostal muscles
and the inferior aspect of the abdomen, okay and that is basically a quick run through
of the spinal nerve, so I hope that was helpful.
If you're having any type of back problem, pain, tingling, numbness, and the pelvis,
the sacroiliac joint, the hip joint, you need to do this stretch because the last part
is going to make all the difference. We're going to target the L5S1, the lowest segment,
to open that area up to get that pressure off the nerve so you can feel better.
You're going to lay on your back, grab the front of the knees. I want you to pull it to the chest.
As you do so, you'll open up that space where the nerve comes out of. You'll stretch all those
lower back muscles. I want you to spread it out and pull it back and out as you open up
the pelvic floor, your groin area, the adductor muscles. You'll hold that for about 30 seconds
as well. Now what I'd like you to do is grab your feet the best you can. Don't worry about
your knees are locked or not. I want you to pull it out like this and pull back. You'll lift the
lower part of your sacrum, lower part of the back off the floor. As you keep pulling back,
you'll stretch that lower lumbar sacral joint right where the sacrum is. To get that pressure
off the nerve, just keep pulling back and lifting up. Hold that a good 60 seconds and your body
will love you.
My name is Josh Whitney. I'm a physical therapist and I'm here today to show you exercises for
low back pain. Unfortunately, 85% of our population will experience some form of low back pain
in their lifetime. It is the second most common reason to seek medical attention from your
primary care physician second only to the common cold. I'm here today to show you exercises that
will stretch and strengthen the musculature supporting the spine. These exercises are safe
and effective. However, you will still need to consult your primary care physician before
beginning a new exercise routine. Our exercises can be done on the floor or on the bed and they
all are going to be starting from this hook lying position. This puts your back at ease and takes
stress off the joints of the spine. The first exercise is called spinal rocking. What you're
going to do here is you're going to gently let your knees fall to the side and you're going to pause
for about a second or so and then you're going to bring your knees up and then gently drop them to
the other side. You want to be slow and controlled when doing this exercise so you're not creating too
much torque on the injured segments of the spine. You want to make sure that you're breathing as
you're doing the exercises. Don't hold your breath and you're engaging your abdominal region as you're
dropping your knees to the side. Typically, I would recommend 10 repetitions twice a day. Our next
exercise is called the curl up. You're going to put your hands onto your thighs and you're going to
slide your fingertips up towards your knees and you're going to do a gentle sit up and come right
back down. As you come up, you are exhaling to prevent holding your breath and creating extra
pressure that may irritate the disc of your spine. You want to take note as to avoid too much neck
bending as this will create some irritation into the neck if performed incorrectly. Our next exercise
is the pelvic tilt. When you do this exercise, it's going to engage your lower abdomen. This is
effective for supporting your spine in sitting and in standing. To do this exercise, you're going to
gently tighten the lower abdomen and roll your hips so that you're flattening the lower part of
your back into the bed or the mat or the floor. You want to pause for at least three to five seconds
and make sure that you're also breathing as you do this exercise. It is very common to hold your
breath during this exercise. This exercise is important because if it's done incorrectly, this
can actually add more irritation to the joints of your back. Our next exercise is called the bridge.
The bridge is an extension of the pelvic tilt. You're going to perform a pelvic tilt and then
you're going to follow it by squeezing your buttocks and gently lifting up and off the mat and then
you're going to hold for roughly three seconds and then slowly lower down. This is important to make
sure that you perform the pelvic tilt before you lift as this exercise is really going to stress
the muscles of the lower back. This exercise should only be done two to three times per week.
You want to avoid hyper extension or overextending of the spine as you do this exercise.
Our next exercise is a knee to chest stretch. You will have the patient bring up one knee
and hold and have them pull it towards their chest. I prefer this exercise again in a bent knee
position and one knee at a time. However, you can do it with both knees up at the same time
and that is not a problem either. You want to hold the stretch for at least 20 seconds.
After you hold for 20 seconds, you're then going to move into the hamstring stretch. The hamstring
is a muscle that connects on the back of your pelvis and runs to your knee. When this muscle is tight,
it can pull down onto your back creating back pain. Again, you want to do a 20 second stretch
when performing this exercise. You can also add your calf into the stretch by pulling your toes
towards your face and setting it down and you will perform on both sides twice a day at least 20
seconds. Our last stretch is called the piriformis stretch. We're going to take the right ankle
and place it onto the left knee. Both hands are then going to grab around the knee
and we're going to pull this knee to the opposite shoulder here. You want to hold it at least 20
seconds and perform this at least twice a day. This is going to stretch into the hip and buttock
on the right side. This is good for individuals that sit at a desk, work all day,
that bend forward frequently throughout the day and it also helps stretch
the muscle that sits right on top of the sciatic nerve. So this is good for individuals that suffer
from sciatica. Pelvic tilts, spinal rocking and curl ups can be performed one to two times a day,
about 10 to 15 reps at a time. The single knee to chest stretch, the hamstring stretch and the
piriformis stretch can be performed two to three times a day for at least a 20 second hold.
Bridges should be performed two to three times per week, about 10 to 15 repetitions at a time.
As with all new exercises, you may experience muscle soreness initially. This should subside over
the next seven to 10 days. If these exercises become painful, please reassess your execution of
the exercise. If you continue to experience pain, it is advised to stop the exercises.
It's important to maintain your stretches in between your therapy session to maximize your
function and to get you better quicker.
Welcome back to Mayo Clinic Radio, I'm Dr. Tom Shives.
And I'm Tracy McCray.
Tracy, as we just discussed with neurosurgeon Dr. Kendall Lee, Mayo Clinic researchers
have made a truly exciting breakthrough in the treatment of spinal cord injuries.
Through electrical stimulation on an injured spinal cord and intense physical therapy,
the first patient implanted with this device at Mayo Clinic is now strong enough to be
able to stand and make movements that are resembling steps.
The patient is actually able to exert some control over his legs again.
Legs that were completely paralyzed.
The latest update on this research was recently published in Nature Medicine.
We've heard about this exciting advancement from the neurosurgeon's perspective, but an
equally important part is the role played by physical medicine and rehabilitation.
In here to tell us about it is Dr. Kristin Zhao and Megan Gill.
Dr. Zhao is the director of Mayo Clinic's Assistive and Restorative Technology Laboratory,
and Megan is a physical therapist in Dr. Zhao's lab.
Welcome both of you to the program.
Thanks for having us.
Thank you.
Yeah, good to have you both.
This must be exciting for both of you to work on this project.
Who's most excited?
I think Megan.
Yeah, you know, being a clinician and having the experience of working with this population
for 14, 15 years now, it's really exciting to be able to finally have something that
we can tell our patients and our patients' families that we're making progress towards
recovery for those who have such a devastating injury, such as a complete spinal cord injury.
So it's really life-changing for me as a professional, but also the experience to be able to tell
our patients that there's hope on the horizon is really, really amazing.
Did you know for a while that this was coming?
Something like this would ultimately become available?
Yeah, I had been kind of following the literature that had been coming out from the UCLA, our
collaborators from UCLA as well as the University of Louisville.
So I was aware of this type of intervention and what it was available to the individuals
with spinal cord injuries and what their outcomes were, which were really promising.
But I think this paper and our results really kind of, our home run compared to where it
started.
And so, you know, we knew there was a possibility, but what was the level of ability and what
was the level of recovery was really beyond my belief at that point.
So it's really amazing to see the progress that we've made to this point.
Anything to add, Dr. Zell?
I guess I would like to just add that, I mean, I think it's exciting that we at Mayo
get to have a team that is able to replicate this work and push it forward.
And now we're really excited because we have this great team together and the possibilities
are sort of endless now for what we can do next.
So what role does therapy play and rehabilitation play in this whole process?
And how important is it?
We know about the implant, we know about the stimulation, but didn't this patient also
have a significant amount of therapy before the implant was ever inserted?
Yeah.
So part of the trial was for the first five to six months we did physical therapy alone
and just worked on the type of activities that were task specific to standing and stepping
and balance training, which is what we continued with after the surgery.
But we really wanted to do the physical therapy intensively just to find out what kind of
recovery is possible with just the therapy alone.
This individual that we've published in the paper had very little physical therapy after
his injury three years prior other than the traditional conventional compensatory strategies.
So it wasn't to the level of what we introduced in the rehab program with this trial.
So he did five to six months of intense therapy with maybe minor improvements in terms of
his endurance and his conditioning, but no recovery below his level of injury.
So what sort of physical therapy do you do on someone whose legs are paralyzed?
So our goal was to regain volitional activation and movement.
Which means?
To be able to intently move their legs or activate their muscles.
So you were trying to get him to be able to move something that wouldn't move?
Correct.
But you can do that?
Correct.
So the strategies that we use with other individuals with neurologic conditions to try to engage
the neuromuscular activity of the legs and the trunk by loading them and by going through
the repetition of the flexion extension moments of the legs.
So it's a standard of care that we typically follow for people who have some motor and
sensory activation, but it's not the standard of care for people who have a complete paralysis
injury such as these individuals.
So you were trying to strengthen the muscles that you knew the patient would need to walk?
Partially, yes.
I remind you that when there's a spinal cord injury, there is no damage to the muscles,
the damages of the spinal cord.
But they shrink, they atrophy.
They atrophy, definitely.
So our purpose was to try to send sensory information up through the nervous system
by loading the legs and providing tactile cues and movements of the legs that can be
sent up through the central nervous system to then try to make the connection in the
nerves to then send a motor output to the muscles.
So does this type of therapy continue indefinitely for the patient?
So we quickly realized that, you know, you can't have epidural electrical stimulation
without physical therapy.
We feel they're both integral into this type of recovery.
So we know it's really important.
So you can put the implant in, but that it won't do any good if you don't have the therapy?
That's our theory that has yet to be proven as well.
But we know physical therapy itself wasn't the answer.
So we had the implant, and we added the therapy and the stimulation together, and we got these
miraculous results.
What goes on from here is a little tricky, because number one, like I said, this is not
the standard of care for someone who has a completely severe spinal cord injury.
So to be able to send this individual out to the clinic now without the standard of
care would be tricky because our clinicians don't know how to manage the stimulator in
conjunction with the therapy, which we feel is really, really valuable.
So we're at the point with this trial where we're really trying to integrate the home
exercise program by identifying the activities that have been really proven safe and possible
for the individuals to do on their own at home with some minimal assistive devices and
then let them do that stuff at home on their own.
And then it's our job to figure out, you know, who is this appropriate, when is it appropriate,
if it is appropriate, and how do we implement it into a standard of care?
So how many patients have had the stimulator now and are presently going through the therapy
and what are the things that they're actually able to do that they couldn't do before?
So we're on our second subject right now, our patient, so we've enrolled two.
We have some research funding to hopefully continue into a new protocol that will be
very similar but will allow us to enroll additional subjects.
Right now, the subject, the first subject is able to, you know, stand alone for a long
period of time.
He's able to...
And wheelchair bound before?
Yes.
He's able to walk or independently step on a treadmill and also over ground with a walker.
So he has some assistance, obviously, to help him, you know, bear weight on his legs, but
he's able to, as Megan described, volitionally move his legs when he wants, so on command.
So that's really the exciting part is where we can go from here now.
Does it improve bladder and bowel function for him?
We've had some anecdotal improvements, although we didn't measure those things directly.
So at this point, our next studies, we're going to do more data collections, which we
hope will help inform whether there is actual return of bowel and bladder.
But they do report kind of a shorter bowel time, so that's a good thing.
We just don't have evidence yet.
You're working with a second patient.
Is it very similar to what the first patient was, or are no two patients the same?
No two patients are the same, so we're seeing some differences, but overall, the progress
is very similar.
So how do we go from one or two individuals to millions?
Because we know there are somewhere between five and six million people out there who
have spinal cord injuries, maybe not complete, but partial.
Where do we go from here?
How can we get this technology for two more people?
Three, four, five, million.
So I think Megan alluded to this earlier, and we've probably both alluded to, you know,
one thing we need is obviously to gain additional research support, money to do this work and
to keep this team moving forward.
But I think one of the other critical questions is, you know, which patients will respond
to this therapy and which ones will not.
So can we come up with a way of saying, you know, out of the millions of patients, you
know, these people will respond and these won't, so that we don't try to, you know,
deliver a therapy that's not going to be successful.
Finally, do you believe that someday paralysis won't be permanent for all patients?
Well, we're definitely making a churn because we used to just talk about how do we compensate
for the deficits that are existing for this population.
And now we're talking about how do we recover and how do we make neuroplasticity occur in
the central nervous system.
So we're definitely making the change and the progress of how we're managing and dealing
with spinal cord injuries, but there's still a lot of work to be done.
Well, you've made so much progress so far, and it's an exciting technology, and you've
both done such great work, and we wish you the very best of luck.
Thank you.
We've been talking about spinal cord stimulation and the role of rehabilitation with Dr. Christian
Zhao from Mayo Clinic's Assistive and Restorative Technology Laboratory.
That's an impressive name.
And Mayo Clinic physical therapist, Megan Gill, thanks so much for being with us.
Thank you.
You
You
All my videos and this video is for educational purposes only please consult your doctor before you make any decision about your medical care.
Thank you.
On the mind of Hussein Han, biology and medicine videos, please make sure to subscribe, join
the form and group for the latest videos, please visit Facebook and Hussein Han and
here please like.
In this video we will talk about the spinal cord.
We know the spinal cord is part of the central nervous system with the brain.
The spinal cord is connected to the brain stem which then connects to the brain up on
the top there.
Now the spinal cord is uniformly organized and is divided into five regions.
Some people say four.
Either way, each of these regions have a number of paired of spinal nerves coming out of them.
So what I mean by this is, for example, the first region of the spinal cord is known as
a cervical region and this has eight pairs of spinal nerves coming out.
So these red things there are spinal nerves coming out, eight pairs.
The thoracic region has 12 pairs of spinal nerves.
The lumbar region has five pairs of spinal nerves.
The sacral region also has five pairs of spinal nerves.
And there is another region where we have one pair of spinal nerves.
These nerves are known as a coxigial nerves because they're sort of close to the cox
spine of the spine.
So if we do our awesome mathematics we can see that we have 31 pairs of spinal nerves
which equates to 62 spinal nerves.
So each of these five regions of the spinal cord are actually different in shape.
So if we were to take a cross section of the cervical region here it would look something
like this.
But before we continue on, the person I draw on the right we are looking at him from a
posterior view.
We're looking at his spinal cord from a posterior view from the back.
But the cross sections of the spinal cord I am drawing we're looking at it from an
anterior view.
So please know that the cross sections I'm drawing on the spinal cord now we're looking
at it from an anterior view.
So anyway this is what our cervical region of the spinal cord would look like.
And here we have a pair of spinal nerves attached to this spinal cord.
The spinal nerve consists of a ventral root, the front root and a dorsal root, the back
root which connects to the spinal cord.
The spinal cord itself consists of a grey matter in the middle and white matter surrounding
it.
The hole in the center is known as the central canal which contains cerebrospinal fluid which
helps in nourishing the nervous tissue.
And we should know what the grey and white matter is because that was taught in the previous
neurology videos.
Now if we were to compare the cervical region of the spinal cord to the thoracic region of
the spinal cord, the thoracic region would look much rounder in shape.
And remember we're looking at it from an anterior view.
And the lumbar region on the other hand looks a bit like a more of a pyramid shape.
Not only that but the lumbar region of the spinal cord has a much thicker grey matter
compared to the other regions.
So as you can see the regions of the spinal cord are all different in shape and all have
different thickness of the grey matter for example.
But all of these regions contain spinal nerves.
Now let's just learn a bit more about the spinal nerves and about its anatomy.
The spinal nerves which connect to the spinal cord is part of the peripheral nervous system
you can say.
Because it carries information between the central nervous system and the periphery.
Because it brings information to the central nervous system, to the spinal cord and also
it takes information from the central nervous system from the spinal cord.
So let's just zoom into the spinal nerve here to learn a bit more about the anatomy.
So here we have the spinal nerve.
The nerve is surrounded by a membrane known as an epineuronium.
We also find blood supply here and also many bundles of neuron which make up what's called
a fascicle.
The fascicle if we pull one out also consists of a membrane called the perineuronium.
Now as mentioned these fascicles they contain many neurons.
Let's just pull one out.
Here we have a neuron which is surrounded by an endonuronium, another membrane.
This neuron is also wrapped by Schwann cells containing myelin and so this is a myelinated
axon of the neuron.
Hope that makes sense.
And as we know myelinated axons they generate faster impulses.
So now that we know a bit more about the spinal nerve let's just go back to the spinal
cord and look at what sort of membranes it has and let's learn a bit more about its
anatomy.
By doing this let's just take a cross section of the spinal cord of the thoracic region.
Now this spinal cord I'm drawing which is part of the thoracic region it can represent
any section of the spinal cord but I'm just drawing this first simplicity.
Because the spinal cord is so important and it's part of the central nervous system it
of course has to have some form of protection, some form of barrier and it does.
It has three layers of protection.
From the most inner membrane it has the Pia matter, then it has the arachnoid membrane,
then it has the dura matter.
And these three make up what's known as the meninges which serve as a protective barrier
of the central nervous system against harmful things.
The central canal which also contains the cerebrospinal fluid also is a form of protection
for the spinal cord as the cerebrospinal fluid also acts like a shock absorber in the central
nervous system.
Now back to the spinal cord section.
Coming out of each side of the spinal cord region we have spinal nerves, right?
We know that.
To make this easier we can draw a line here and say that the spinal cord is part of the
central nervous system and the spinal nerves are part of the peripheral nervous system.
The spinal nerve that is part of the peripheral nervous system consists of a ventral root,
the front root and a dorsal root, the back root.
But both are connected to the spinal cord and both also join up with each other to form
a big spinal nerve.
The dorsal root contains also a dorsal ganglion.
We can also have another ganglion here which we will discuss about later on.
Dorsal ganglion is basically a location where synapses can occur and also where cell bodies
are located.
It's basically bundles of neurons.
But anyway the dorsal root of the spinal nerve is always for sensory neurons and these are
where sensory neurons are.
So sensory neurons bring in sensory information to the spinal cord via the dorsal root here.
And then it will synapse with another neuron in the central nervous system in the spinal
cord which this new neuron will then bring this sensory information to the brain or the
brainstem or somewhere in the central nervous system for processing, for interpretation.
So what I mean is that all sensory neurons from the periphery such as this sensory neuron
I am drawing with myelin wrapping around it, this will receive some form of sensory stimulation
be it touch, pain, pressure or what not, this will bring this sensory information to the
central nervous system through the dorsal root of the spinal nerve.
The sensory neurons body is located in the dorsal ganglion here.
Then the sensory neuron will pass on the information to the second neuron, the second neuron will
then bring this sensory information to the brain or brainstem for processing, for realizing
that there is some sensory information coming to the body.
Now if the dorsal root is for sensory neurons bringing in sensory information to the central
nervous system that means the ventral root is for the efferent neurons, for the motor
neurons.
So for example signals or commands from the brain or brainstem will come down to a particular
location in the spinal cord and then these neurons will then synapse with efferent neurons
here also known as motor neurons which will bring this command, this information somewhere
to a target tissue.
Now this efferent neuron, this motor neuron is actually a somatic neuron which means that
it is bringing information or commands to initiate movement, so it's going to bring
information commands to skeletal muscle for contraction for example and this neuron therefore
is voluntary because we can control movement, it is a somatic neuron.
However there is another type of neuron, another type of efferent neuron that can bring information
out of the central nervous system.
This neuron will in red will actually stop over in this ganglion and synapse with another
efferent neuron.
This efferent neuron or motor neuron is known as an autonomic neuron because it is part
of the autonomic nervous system, it is controlled involuntary, it will bring information or
bring commands from the central nervous system to tissues, target cells and tissues such
as cardiac muscle cells, smooth muscle cells and certain glands or all glands because we
have no control over these types of cells.
Now let's just look at it as a summary, we have the central nervous system where we have
the spinal cord and within the spinal cord we have neurons that carry sensory information
and also carry commands within the spinal cord.
Then we have the peripheral nervous system which consists of two types of neurons, we
have the sensory neurons and we have the efferent neurons also known as the motor neurons.
The sensory neurons bring information to the central nervous system whereas the efferent
neurons take information from the central nervous system to a target cell, to a target
tissue, to the periphery.
So here we are looking at the efferent neurons, so commands or information from the central
nervous system will travel via efferent neurons, efferent neurons can be either somatic meaning
that they are voluntary or autonomic meaning that they are involuntary and this all depends
on what type of target tissue or cell is going to.
Hope you enjoyed this video, it's only an introduction to the spinal cord, I'll have
another video that will go into sort of a bit more detail and it might be even easier
than this one, so look forward to that and I'll probably provide a link.
Thank you for watching.
Good.
Breathe.
Okay, so we're going to try to do the same.
Same thing, yep. First, let's just start with finding your center.
Okay.
Tighten the core here and here.
Okay.
Here and here.
Two, three, four, five,
six, seven. There you go.
Good. You're going to do
both crutches, left, right. Both crutches,
left, right. Okay. Left,
right. Crutch, left,
right. Crutch,
left, right. Good.
Good. Squeeze and scoop the hips underneath you.
Good. A little wider with the crutches.
There you go. Good.
Bring the hip back.
Nice.
What was that?
Stand up nice and tall. Good.
Good.
Deep breath in. Good.
Starting treadmill in
three, two, one.
You're at a minute and a half.
55% body weight support. Speed 1.6.
Shift to the right. Left leg up.
Squeeze here. Body nice and strong and tall. Hold it.
Shift right. Left foot down.
Good. Even weight.
Shift left. Squeeze that left knee, left hip.
Up. Hold it. Left hip strong.
Right foot down. Good. Squat down.
Come forward all the way up.
And down. Good. Hips forward.
And step. Hips forward.
Step. Good.
Quick, quick, quick.
Quick, quick, quick.
And rest.
Good.
Good.
Good.
Good.
Good.
Great.
Good.
Walk out that left knee.
Good. Squeeze the hips.
Bring them up higher. There you go.
And rest. Good.
Good.
Good.
Good.
What was quad?
Good.
Okay, so for this one, everything's going to kind of start contracting together.
You're going to try to squeeze your glutes, lift them up, and just
translating your knees forward, okay? Okay.
We're going to do a set of 10. Ready?
Go. So up. Squeeze. Nice.
Hold it.
And down slow.
Okay, I'll make it a little faster, okay?
It's all about the control and the endurance of these muscles.
Up. Squeeze, squeeze. Lift them up as high as you can.
Good. A little longer.
And down. Controlling on the way down.
Good. Curl up. Good. And down.
That's the pattern, okay? Curl up.
Good. And down.
Up.
And down.
Rest.
Are you experiencing back and leg pain with prolonged standing or walking, which is greatly
relieved with sitting?
Hey everyone, this is Dr. Zach Grudman here at Performance Sport & Spine, and today's
video will be addressing back and leg pain that's caused from lumbar stenosis.
What is your low back or lumbar spine?
Everybody talking about is your low back or lumbar spine, which is comprised of five
bones called vertebras.
In between those bones are discs, and your spinal cord runs inside those bones and is
protected in the spinal canal, which will be relevant later.
So what does this condition feel like?
Well it's simply found in people over the age of 50, there may be back, buttock, or thigh
pain, and the pain may rate down into your ankles or knees.
The pain is worse with standing and walking, and relieved with sitting.
You may also experience a feeling of heaviness in the legs, or pins and needles.
Night cramps is a very underappreciated symptom of this condition, as well as people may adopt
a wide gait to help with balance.
So what is causing your condition?
Look at this model right now, that spinal cord and those nerves are inside the spinal
canal, and stenosis means nearing.
So over time, structures can press on those nerve and blood vessels, causing irritation
and compression, which causes neurogenic cloudification, which makes the symptoms in your legs.
Now again, some people have the stenosis, but no pain, so lumbar stenosis is the changes
in the structures.
Neurogenic cloudification is the leg symptoms.
And the stenosis can affect the spinal canal in the middle, which usually affects both
legs, or it can affect the neural foramina on the side, which affects just one nerve
root, and often leads to symptoms on just one leg.
Most important thing conceptually is positions like standing, extend or arch the spine, narrowing
that canal, causing more compression potentially, and positions like sitting, kind of flex or
arch the back, opening up that canal and relieving pressure on the spinal cord.
And this compression can be caused by a variety of structures, such as bones, ligaments and
discs.
And it's important to note that this is a gradual thing over time, which is why it's
more prevalent in older people.
It takes years and decades for these changes to slowly matter.
Also importantly to note, a large amount of people that have lumbar stenosis on imaging
actually don't have symptoms, and we'll discuss this more in detail later.
There's also a vascular condition that can present what's similar that we'll discuss
later in the video.
People often think, well, the bone is compressing the nerve.
Why would I do an exercise because surgery is my only option?
Your bones may not change, but your nerves can get better.
And it's important to note, there is no cure for this.
This will probably just get worse and worse over time, so self-management and interventions
is paramount.
So now we'll discuss posture and day-to-day modifications.
So the first thing you want to do is temporarily reduce walking and standing, however walking
to tolerance is still safe.
Another option is to use a step in the kitchen to help elevate your foot and put your spine
in a more comfortable position.
And for walking, using hiking poles can help be in a more slouched position, or just generally
kind of being a little bit bend over may help.
And then while grocery shopping, you can actually bend over the shopping cart and use that to
kind of stay in a more comfortable position, and this is actually called the shopping
cart sign, and it's very indicative of lumbar stenosis.
So now we'll go over some stretches and movements that can help decrease the irritation of those
nerves.
And the first set are all that you can do standing up or sitting, as this affects a
more elderly group, and then the second set are ones that you require to lay down.
So the first is just a standing march.
Using one hand, it breaks against the wall or a pole, just pull one leg up as high as
you can, and then the other.
And again, as you pull your leg up, it kind of increases the flexion of your back and
is going to open up that canal.
Now again, if you can only bring your leg up a little bit, that's fine.
And then over time build up strength and try to go higher.
But again, the higher you go, the more it's going to open up that canal in the back.
So the assisted bend over.
So grab a pole or a wall, and then with your feet kind of shoulder width apart, you're
going to push your hips back and kind of lean your head through your shoulders, getting
a nice stretch on your low back, stand up with your hips, and then repeat this motion.
If you feel a little too uncomfortable, you can get a little closer and just minimize
the motion.
And then as you get more comfortable, you can bring your feet farther back and use
the stretch that way.
It's important to tailor it to your current fitness and symptom level.
Standing post to your pelvic tilt.
So we're going to think of our pelvis as a cup, and we're going to tilt it backwards
or pour the water out the back.
And a good cue of that is to squeeze your abs and your glutes so you should feel your
pelvis kind of roll backwards and come forward.
Another good cue is you can think of your belly button and your belt buckle, and you
want to pull those together and then relax.
Now this may be a little difficult initially, but with a little bit of practice, it can
become second nature.
So the seated stretch.
In a seated position with your knees slightly bent, you're going to want to take your right
hand and gently reach down to your left foot, come back to the starting position, and then
reach your left hand to your right foot.
Again, this is something you want to start slow and then increase the range of motion
gradually.
You don't want to really pull it in range or force it.
Again, as you feel tension in your low back and put your spine in a position that decreases
the nerve irritation.
So the standing quad stretch.
So with your hand against the wall, place the outside leg up onto a small step or chair,
and you're going to stretch inside that front muscle.
So we're going to roll that pelvis backwards and then lean forward until we get a nice
tension.
Now again, this is mild.
Don't really pull hard out of an end range.
And again, you don't want to arch your back.
That will just cause more compression.
So again, roll that pelvis, feel some gentle tension, and then push through your hip forward,
maintaining that neutral or slouched position.
Don't arch backwards.
So for the first stretch, it's going to be the knees to chest.
So laying on the ground with your knees bent, we're going to pull our knees towards our
chest to tolerance, and then come back and repeat.
A regression would be this is too challenging to just pull one leg towards your chest at
a time, and then as the symptoms decrease and your fitness increases, you can progress
to two legs.
The floor press.
So what we're going to do is press our back, flatten to the floor, and then come up.
So think of the arch.
You're trying to flatten the arch by pressing your spine towards the floor.
Hold it, and then come back up.
Again, flatten our back, hold for half a second, and then come up.
Now I have a more arch than normal, so you don't have to actually press into the floor,
per se, but the idea is just to push your spine down to the floor to tolerance.
Supine rotation.
So your arms straight with one leg straight, another one bent, you're going to roll that
leg over your side, and then come back.
And again, these are mild stretches initially, so we're not trying to crank hard.
We're just going to go as far as your body allows you, and then return.
And they should be dynamic.
We're moving constantly.
We're not holding any one position.
And then you repeat on the opposite side.
You may find that one side feels tighter, so you may have to reduce the range of motion,
and then progress a little slowly on the more symptomatic side.
Supine posterior tilt.
So laying on your back, we're going to roll our pelvis backwards.
So again, we're going to squeeze our glutes or our abs, or we're going to pull our belly
button to our imaginary belt buckle, and we're going to flatten our back relative to the
floor.
Again, slow and controlled, and start gradually.
So the quadruped rock back.
So on your hands and knees, using your hands, push back, and let your back relax.
Hold for half a second, and come forward.
And again, as you bring your back back, you want your back muscles to relax as much as
possible.
Don't let your back extend your arch.
So again, the back is kind of passive, and we're moving our body with our arms, not our
back or our core.
And again, over time, you may want to try to press a little bit more with your hands.
Some people may find that a little wider knee placement gives them range of motion.
You have to tingle with that, because each person is different.
So the banded cat camel.
Now if this is too advanced, you can start without the band, but placing the band around
your back, angered with your hands to the floor, we're going to round our back up, and
then come back to neutral.
Again, you don't want to arch or extend your spine, because that can potentially decrease
the canal.
So we're going to round up towards the ceiling, squeezing our glutes, come back to neutral.
Again, round your whole body, bring your chin down, hold, and then come back to neutral.
And then now we'll discuss some exercises and rehab to help strengthen the back.
So the first one is a suitcase carry.
So the lightweight in one hand, walk down a hall, maintaining good spinal position.
This helps improve load confidence in terms of carrying weight and helps stabilizing the
spine.
The section option, the second option is carrying weight in both hands.
And again, this proves that your back is strong and gives you more confidence to move and
carry things in day to day life.
So grabbing two light weights, walk down the hall to tolerance, turn around, and come back.
Again, remember to keep a neutral spine and don't let your back arch.
As you fatigue those erectors, those spinal muscles will probably have you lean back a
little bit, so stop before that happens.
So the seated deadlifts is probably my favorite exercise for this condition, because you're
going to move a lot of weight in a very safe manner.
So in a seated position with your knees bent, we're going to grab a lightweight to start,
bend over, and then lift with our butt and our back to a neutral position.
Try very hard to not overextend or push our shoulders back.
Sometimes it can help to put your hand on your back, use one arm to have a tactile cue.
But again, the goal is to lift with your back and your butt to a neutral position, not extend.
And then as you get stronger, more confident, increase the weight.
So again, it proves to you that you can use your back in a safe manner and that lifting
things heavy is not inherently bad.
That's what your body can currently handle that matters.
Now we're going to show you a great exercise that's safe using the exercise ball to help
build strength in your low back.
So in a kneeling position without tummy on the ball, cross your arms, or you may want
to have one arm for brace, and we're going to slouch down to the floor.
And then using our back, we're going to kind of come up to neutral and then hold.
And the goal of this is to build endurance, not strength, so we're going to hold longer
and longer and then rest.
Make sure to come only to neutral and not overextend or arch the spine.
And again, you may only will hold it for five seconds at your first.
That's fine.
But the goal is to build endurance over time.
So now we're talking about walking and cycling.
Now it's absolutely safe to walk with this condition, but you're going to have to do
less initially.
The best way to do this is to establish a baseline using some sort of stepometer to
find out how many steps you can do without aggravating your symptoms.
Once you've found that you can gradually increase over time, a couple of great substitutions
are using a treadmill on a slight incline because you can lean over and help take tension
off your back.
Or again, using those hiking poles that we talked about earlier to help you be in a
more slouched position.
And then seated cycling is probably the best exercise for this because the very nature
of the spine position in cycling is a position that takes compression off those nerves.
And by doing this cycling, you can increase the blood flow to the areas to help healing,
build confidence, and just maintain general human health, which is greatly going to impact
this condition.
So how do you know if you have this condition?
We're going to cover some clinical criteria now.
So the first one is the standing exertion test.
In a standing position, if you extend your arch backwards at 30 seconds, does this reproduce
your symptoms?
Secondly, are you over the age of 60?
Thirdly, does your pain increase with standing or walking?
Fourth, does your pain be relieved by sitting?
And then fifth, is your symptoms in your legs bilateral or are both legs affected?
Our spinal canal is shaped different, so some people have this triophile spinal canal where
others have a round or oval, and about 7-10% of them at the L4 level have this triophilus
shape, which may indicate an increased likelihood for stenosis as there is less room in the
spinal canal, therefore the compression is more likely.
As for over-the-counter medication, NSAIDs have more evidence than acetaminophen or
Tylenol, however the small effects size for both, and no one should use them with any
comorbidities or contraindications.
So what's actually causing this irritation of the nerve?
Well if you look at this image right here, you can see this nerve is a blue structure,
and then this black thing is a small blood vessel that runs through the nerve, and the
red stuff is the oxygenated blood that goes in, and then the blue stuff is the deoxygenated
blood that runs out.
Well as these structures compress the nerve, they pinch that small artery, and so the
blood flows in, but it can't flow out, and starts to swell.
This goes on long enough, it starts to irritate and damage the nerve, which is causing your
symptoms.
Once the compression is relieved, the blood can flow through again, which is why sometimes
these are transit, which is why standing hurts and sitting feels better.
Imaging prognosis and risk factors.
So there's no gold standard for lumbar stenosis, and there's lots of people that have radiographic
lumbar stenosis with no symptoms.
For instance, this paper found that people in their 50s, 64% of people had moderate to
severe lumbar stenosis with no symptoms, and people in their 80s, 93% had moderate to
severe stenosis with no symptoms, and only 17% had severe symptoms.
Imaging should be used to confirm whether a history and physical exam has already found
it can't diagnose the person in and of itself.
MRI and CT scans are the preferred choice, and for prognosis, this study found that at
three year follow-ups, one third of the people improved, 50% of the people stayed the same,
and then 10 to 20% of the people got worse over time.
And then risk factors are high BMI, diabetes, hypothyroidism, certain genes, and then age.
And then now we're going to talk about the other vascular condition we talked about earlier.
So this is vascular cloudification caused by peripheral artery disease.
So the arteries are getting smaller or blocked, decreasing the blood flow.
This affects the legs, this is exertional leg pain, so both walking and cycling will
make this worse.
Again, the more you move or exercise, the more this condition affects you, and rest in any
position helps.
So there's no position aspects to this, and there's a diminished pulse in your lower
extremity.
The most important criteria for this condition is the ankle brachial pressure index, and
this number is less than 0.9.
It's indicative of this condition.
So surgery.
So it turns out it's mixed like lots of other things.
The most common is lumbar decompression by lemonectomy.
Now it's important that this decision should always be shared between the practitioner
and the individual.
It is pretty helpful in short-term, but we need more evidence for long-term in terms
of quality studies.
Now if you have cauda equinoid symptoms such as urinary retention or fecal incontinence,
rapid progressive muscle weakness, or a degenerous spinal acesis, surgery is urgent and medically
required.
Thank you so much for watching our video on lumbar stenosis.
We hope you give this some stretches and advice to help manage this condition on your
own.
If you did find the video helpful, please like the video and subscribe to our channel, and
don't forget to check out our other videos.
If you're suffering from spinal stenosis, then there are some terrible pieces of advice out there
that you need to ignore because if you don't, it's going to make your problem more painful.
Hi everybody, my name is Will Harlow and I'm the over 50s and sciatica specialist
here at HT Physio in Farnham and today I'm going to be revealing five terrible pieces of advice
that are often given to spinal stenosis sufferers that cause them more suffering than they need.
Now, before we dive into the content of the video, if you haven't already, please hit like on
the video and subscribe to the channel because then you'll be the first to hear about our new
spinal stenosis videos when they come out and I've got loads in the pipeline. If you're enjoying
these videos, please consider sharing them with a friend or family member because then they'll
benefit from the videos too. Now that that's been said, let's talk about spinal stenosis.
What we're talking about today is something called true spinal stenosis which is categorized by
widespread wear and tear changes, so arthritic changes that are occurring specifically in the
lower spine. So to show you what I'm talking about here, this is the human spine. So we've got the
pelvis at the bottom here. You can see these white things here are the vertebrae. These are the bones.
In between them, we've got the intervertebral discs and then in these little gaps between the
vertebrae, we've got the nerves here, and these nerves are cut off in the diagram, but in reality
they run all the way down the leg. Now as we get older, almost all of us will suffer from some kind
of age-related deterioration to our spines, and what tends to happen is we lose some of the water
from our discs, so our discs become thinner. We also get arthritis in the facet joints at the back,
so they lose their cartilage, the bones can thicken, they can become stiffer, and all of these aging
changes basically lead to these spaces that the nerves live in becoming smaller. Now for most
of us this happens without us even realizing, because for most people these changes aren't
painful at all, but for some people the changes can get so severe they cause a condition called
spinal stenosis, and spinal stenosis is the widespread effect that these changes have if
they're happening all over the the bottom of the spine causing much narrower spaces for these nerves
to live in, and eventually if it crosses a certain threshold the nerves in the spine can get pinched.
So we call this a structural problem because it's caused by changes to the actual size and shape of
the spine or the nerves or the size and shape of the spaces that the nerves live in, and typically
it only affects people who are over the age of 60, so this is something we see most commonly
in people in their 80s and above, but it's quite rare for people under 60 to get this,
and typically it sort of shows up as lower back pain to begin with that gets worse when you stand
and walk, and then what can happen is the person who's got it can develop leg pain, so typically
it's pain down the backs of the calves, usually both sides, which again gets worse when they walk,
and then goes away when they sit down. Now to get a diagnosis of spinal stenosis x-rays and MRI scans
are usually the most sensible way to go, but quite often we can tell someone whether or not
they're likely suffering from spinal stenosis just from a clinical examination. The advice I'm
about to share now does not apply to everyone, it only applies to 80% of people, and what I'm
saying here is not that with this piece of advice we can cure spinal stenosis because unfortunately
is an incurable problem, it's not something that anyone can fix for you, but we can improve the
symptoms with the right advice. Now the way that spinal stenosis causes pain when walking is because
when we're upright like this for a sustained period of time the weight of our body starts to
compress everything in the spine, so the discs get compressed slowly and the areas between the
facet joints become closed down as well, and that means that these spaces that the nerves live in
become narrowed, and that's why when people with spinal stenosis walk and when they stand
their symptoms can get worse, because the longer they stay upright the more that slight compression
happens, because these spaces are already so small they get closed down even more and a nerve can
become compressed. Now in people without spinal stenosis obviously we can walk and stand for as
long as we want, because even though these compressive effects are still happening the spaces are
big enough so that we don't feel them, but because the spaces have structurally become smaller
that's why these things can be difficult for people with spinal stenosis. So let's talk about
five terrible pieces of advice that people with spinal stenosis get and how you should avoid them
in order to make your life much more comfortable. So the first terrible piece of advice given to
spinal stenosis sufferers is just stand upright. Now when people have spinal stenosis what they
often come to tell me in the clinic is that I feel awful because when I'm walking I start to bend
forward and I just can't stop it from happening. My wife or my husband is telling me I'll just
stand up straight you've got this back pain because you're always slouching, but every time I try to
stand up straight the pain gets worse, and telling people to stand up straight when they have spinal
stenosis is actually the wrong advice to give. The person who has spinal stenosis is leaning
forward for a reason, and the reason they're leaning forward is because when they're upright
the compressive effects are worse, but when they slightly lean forward, I don't know if you can
see that here, but the spaces where the nerves live actually become bigger. So if we slightly
lean forward when we're walking that can actually improve the symptoms of spinal stenosis and allow
you to walk a little bit further. So in many cases with other conditions standing up straight is
good advice, but with spinal stenosis is actually the wrong advice to give. I know it's often
well-meaning advice, but it will make the symptoms feel worse. So you can allow yourself to lean
forward. One of the best ways to do this is if you're walking around the supermarket which tends
to be a pretty bad time for people to get a trolley and to allow yourself to just put your
arms on the trolley to keep yourself slightly forward, that should open up the spaces in the
spine enough so that the pain improves. So don't listen to people who tell you you have to stand
and walk upright. Now the second terrible piece of advice that people with spinal stenosis are
often given is just walk through it. Now the reason people have pain when they're walking with
spinal stenosis is because of a structural compression. So if you keep walking it's not
necessarily going to go away and people with spinal stenosis often find that the more they walk
the worse the pain gets. Now this doesn't mean that walking is a bad thing to do and it definitely
doesn't mean that you're going to damage yourself when you walk. In fact walking is still a good
form of exercise for someone with spinal stenosis, but the caveat here is that it shouldn't be done
through extreme pain. So what I usually recommend to my patients who have spinal stenosis is keep
walking as much as you feel you can, but when that pain gets to a point where it feels like it's
really bothering you try and find a bench or try and find a small wall or a chair that you can sit on
for two or three minutes just to allow everything to decompress and to improve the symptoms
and then that should allow you to get back up and start walking again. So don't feel like you have
to keep walking through it. There are some injuries where walking through it's a good idea,
but spinal stenosis is not one of them. So keep walking but stop when it becomes painful and allow
yourself to sit down. Now the third terrible piece of advice for people with spinal stenosis
is that they should use the cobra to help with leg pain. Now the cobra is a very common sciatica
exercise that we see online and basically it's categorized by lying on your front and pushing
up like this to bend back at the lower spine. You keep your pelvis on the floor and you push
up like this so it's like a half press up and it allows your spine to do this position. And the
reason it's given as such a good sciatica exercise is that it is usually a good exercise for people
with bulging discs or herniated discs. It doesn't work every time as I've explained in many of my
other videos, but it can often give relief. However, when you have spinal stenosis you're
almost moving in opposite patterns to people with disc problems. So most people with disc problems
find that bending forward makes their pain worse and standing up straight makes their pain feel
better. Whereas people with spinal stenosis or true spinal stenosis find the opposite. So they
find that bending forward and sitting relieves the symptoms but leaning back makes them worse.
So if you then lie on your front and then you push yourself up into extension like this lots of
times, all you're doing is you're closing down the spaces where the nerves live and you're making
that compression worse. So if you have true spinal stenosis the cobra is actually one of the worst
exercises you could do. It will aggravate the problem and it will make your leg pain and your
back pain feel worse. You'll probably also find that you can't lift yourself up very high because
you're basically just hitting a wall and that wall is basically the facet joints coming together
and stopping you from going any further. Not great for the back, right? We don't want to just keep
trying to force it to do something it's not any more designed to do. So avoid the cobra if you
have spinal stenosis and don't listen to anyone who says that it always works for sciatica because
it doesn't in the case of spinal stenosis. Now the fourth terrible piece of advice for spinal
stenosis is you need to get manipulated by a chiropractor for relief. Now many people do
find that chiropractic manipulations help them with their pain but I would strongly recommend
against chiropractic manipulation for people with stenosis and one of the main reasons for that is
the safety aspect. Now if you already have a loss of disc space you already have stiff worn down
facet joints and quite bad arthritis in the spine, the space that the nerves live is very,
very small already then you're asking someone to come along and really yank down on a spine that's
very stiff to try and manipulate it. It's asking for trouble and I've met many people with spinal
stenosis who got manipulated and it made their symptoms worse. Thankfully most of these cases
were temporary but sometimes it can even cause permanent problems. Now as a general rule I would
never use manipulative techniques on someone who had moderate to severe arthritis in the spine.
That's just me maybe that works for other practitioners I'm not here to tell people
whether they should or they shouldn't do it that's just what I feel but personally I wouldn't
go and get a spinal manipulation if I had spinal stenosis because obviously the areas in there are
already very stiff they're already very small in terms of the areas that the nerves live and you're
just asking for a higher risk of injury. Now that's not to say that you can't get chiropractic
treatment at all soft tissue work and other techniques might be useful but to get a rapid
manipulation is probably a pretty bad idea. Now that's not to say that it might it won't work for
you some people do find that it's helpful some people find it gives some temporary or even permanent
relief but I would just err on the side of caution and advise against it so for that reason it makes
the list of bad advice for people with spinal stenosis and then the fifth terrible piece of
advice that people with spinal stenosis often get is that exercises don't help. Now it's absolutely
true when I see people talk about online that exercises won't cure spinal stenosis you're
absolutely right they won't cure spinal stenosis it's not something we can cure through conservative
means but that doesn't mean they won't help and when I say help what I mean is provide temporary
relief or relieve some of the stiffness or build back strength or improve walking and all of these
things can be done usually through exercise. So it's easy to say that oh just because the exercises
won't cure it is pointless in doing them but I think that's the wrong approach I personally think
that's throwing the baby out with the bathwater. Now I've had patients with pretty bad spinal
stenosis and even though we can't cure it we have improved their symptoms we have helped them to
walk further we have helped them to put in place strategies that stop that pain before it gets very
very bad when they're out and about and while we haven't been able to cure it what we have done is
added significant value to these people's lives. Now if you feel like it's worthwhile trying to
improve things then I definitely suggest going to get an assessment from someone who can give you
the right exercises for your condition but you have to understand that it's not something that
will be fixed by the exercises. So once you've got that in your mind you can come at it from a
different perspective and basically just see the value in more mobility and slightly less pain
even if the problem will never fully go away. So I hope that's all made sense those are the
five terrible pieces of advice that people with spinal stenosis get. So number one is telling
people to just stand upright or to walk more upright. Number two is telling people to just
walk through it. Number three is to always use the cobra to get relief. Number four is to go and get
manipulated by a chiropractor and number five is that exercises never work. Anyway I hope that's
all made sense if that video has been useful for you please leave a comment below and if you want
to get more from me you can pick up a copy of my book it's called Thriving Beyond 50 and you can
find it on Amazon using the link below this video it's got loads of mobility exercises and things
like that to help with back pain and spinal stenosis. So I hope that's made sense thank you for
watching and I look forward to speaking to you on the next video.
Good morning. My name is William Porter McRabbitz MD. I'm an interventional spine doc, an interventional
physiatrist here in Fort Lauderdale. Today I want to talk to you about spinal stenosis,
what it is, what the current treatments are, and what are the options for people who have
spinal stenosis. So today I'm just basically going to have a clinic visit with you as the
patient. Presumably you've either heard of or been diagnosed with spinal stenosis. The first
thing to understand is what it is. It is a disease of the spine where the canal narrows
because of settling over time and that settling essentially comes and pinches the nerve roots.
I'm going to show you some MRIs. I'm going to show you how to read an MRI. I'm going to explain how
it works in the pathophysiology, why people hurt and why people have this problem over the next
few minutes. Spinal stenosis really only affects older folks and virtually everybody if you've
been around a little while knows that people settle and they lose height. My own dad has lost a
couple inches even though he's had no back pain. It's because the disc settle over time. It's
commensurate to living on a planet through gravity. It's kind of like wrinkles. It just happens.
But the problem is those discs have no place to go as they settle and the ligaments surrounding the
disc and also in the back part of the spine have no place to go but in. The in that they go is
inside the actual canal. You can see the canal here. It's a bony rigid hole too, so to speak,
that houses the spinal cord and the nerve roots and as the lumbar spine settles, those ligaments
move into the canal and compete for space with the descending nerve roots that go to your buttocks
and legs. The hallmark symptoms of this problem are that folks have low back, buttock and leg
tiredness, weakness or pain with walking. This problem is generally relieved or made better
when folks sit down. It's just the neuroanatomy. The spine, when we walk and stand, develops
an increased lordosis or curvature and that curvature of the spine actually accentuates and
increases the infolding of the ligaments competing for space with the nerve roots and that's why
those nerve roots and your leg and your buttock seems to cramp or hurt when you stand and walk
because that curve accentuates the infolding of the ligament and competes with space. As you sit,
however, what happens is the femurs come forward and bends the sacrum back and it opens up the
canal and then those nerve roots can breathe. So this is a very common problem. It's approximately
800,000 Americans a year are diagnosed with this. It's about equal to knee arthritis and hip
arthritis, maybe a little more prevalent and essentially everyone's going to get it at some
point in their life if they continue to stay on the planet and age and it's become a real issue.
And sadly, the only thing that we had for many years was a big open surgery called a laminectomy
and then consequently a fusion. And so we were for many years faced with a decision either to
perform a big operation on the low back, this open laminectomy infusion, or simply live with it
and maybe have some epidurals or shots in and around those nerve roots, put a little steroid
to see if we can reduce the pressure on the nerves. Sadly, those injections have not been
shown to be super efficacious over a protracted period of time. Some folks around 30% of people
get meaningful relief, but the remaining 70% simply don't get long-term relief. And so those
folks are left with essentially a big surgical decision. Physical therapy is one of the things
we've tried in the past as well. And the only type of physical therapy that really works
is physical therapy that works on strengthening the abdominal musculature so it maintains the
flatness of the spine as you stand and walk. But that's difficult. And over the many years I've
been in practice and tens of thousands of people I've seen to smile so notice that I've only had
a couple people get long-term meaningful relief with physical therapy. Those two folks interestingly
were both doctors who took it upon themselves to do sit-ups to the cow's gum home or crunches rather
and strengthened those abdominal muscles so it changed the actual angle of their spine.
And they were both successful, but virtually everyone else I've ever seen has not been able
to do that. So the great problem is that as people have this disease and it progresses,
their walking tolerance and distance diminishes immensely. And as Hippocrates said, walking is
the supreme medicine. And if you can't walk, then everything deteriorates. You get cardiovascular
disease, you get osteoporosis, depression, can't get around, can't go see the grandkids, you can't
take care of yourself, everything goes down. And the ability to care for yourself and to maintain
your health is essentially dependent on walking. And as that distance and tolerance drops, the
rest of your animal suffers. So why does it happen? It happens because the discs settle over time.
Who does it happen to? It happens to everybody. There's no getting out of this life without being
essentially exposed to some spinal stenosis. Some folks are born with a larger central canal
and they're less likely to have it. It's just the luck of the draw. Some people are more petite or
their their canal is a little more narrow congenital. And they're at a higher likelihood of having this
issue. The symptoms are essentially a function of the compression of the nerves. We know that the
perfusion pressure of these last tiny little arteries, arterioles we call them, that perfuse
the nerves, is about 30 to 35 millimeters of mercury. So if you think about your blood pressure,
120 over 80, of course, you've got perfect blood pressure, that pressure is at the heart.
And as the blood then is distributed into the peripheral vasculature into the arteries that get
first day order and then the bifurcation and thus smaller and smaller arteries, that pressure drops.
And at a certain point, that pressure where in the smallest arteries that arterioles deliver
oxygen to the tissue and then pass the blood on to the veins, you need about 30 millimeters of
mercury to get that blood through. So you can you can do a quick task. If you press your say
your finger on your skin, and if you blanch the skin, you're you're overcoming that perfusion
pressure. And that's what's actually happening in your spinal canal with these nerve roots that are
inside the canal. The ligament is pressing on those nerves and it's overcoming the perfusion
pressure and the blood is not getting through to the nerves. And you get ischemia or loss of blood
flow and oxygen delivery to the nerves. And that's why you feel the cramping and pain in the areas
that those nerves serve, which is generally your buttocks and legs and feet, possibly calves,
commonly back of thighs. As you sit down, you change the anatomy, you the spine is a mobile
substrate. So as you sit, it moves, it changes position and the the ligaments are pulled off
of the of the canal off the nerves. And all of a sudden, those arteries are allowed to
perfuse those nerves and the feeling returns and the the claudication we call it goes away.
I would say spinal stenosis is a disease of millimeters. One millimeter more of compression
and significant symptoms exist one millimeter less and sometimes one's asymptomatic. And we know this
because the position can change. And the the implications for the spinal anatomy are
significant. Sitting is dramatically better than standing and walking. And the greater that difference,
the greater the disease process, and also the sadly the likelihood or happily the likelihood
for a good outcome with some of these minimally invasive procedures that we're going to talk about.
So how do we look at the MRI? I'm going to explain the MRI here. And I want you to just
follow through, you can open up your own MRI and have a look and read it just like the radiologist
does. And have a look at it. So here we go. Okay, so here we are looking at an MRI and I'll have to
explain just essentially how how we look at the MRI. These are two images. The one on the left is
what we call a sagittal cut. And this is an axial cut. And the first thing that we notice is that
this all looks foreign to most people. So we got to understand this is imagine a person sitting
and facing to the left side. And this is the skin of their back. This slice goes right down
through the actual middle of their back. And so we can see this little purple scout line that shows
us where this slice is. And as I say, MRIs are really a digital autopsy. We get to open up the
patient and look inside and see the anatomy without ever using a knife. Thank goodness.
And so to understand what we're looking at the way the spine is formed is we have the skin here,
subcutaneous tissues, and we're essentially going deeper and more towards the stomach and
guts which are out here. And you see these next are the bony spinous processes, you can see them
there, the ligaments in between. And then inside the canal inside the tube is essentially two things.
We see cerebral spinal fluid, which is the light white. And then the dark gray is the spinal cord
and the nerve roots. If we go more to the front more anterior, we see the bones separated by disc,
bone, disc, bone, disc. And that comes all the way down to the sacrum. So this is the base of your
of your buttock. If I put my finger right here on someone's back could be right at the top of
their cleft of their buttock. And then this would be about the base of their ribs right up about
maybe about six or eight inches up someone's back. So we see disc, bone, disc, bone, disc,
bone. And then we see aorta, vena cava, and all the guts out front. So the first thing we notice,
I'll show you what a normal disc looks like. This is a normal disc. What's normal? This is a 88-year-old
patient of mine. This disc right here is tall, plump, and juicy, which is more like a 45 or
a 50-year-old disc. These three look wonderful. There's no, there's minimal posterior bulging.
It was a little bit in the front. And you can see that as a result of this tall disc, the canal is
additionally open and capacious. As we come down, we see this disc is significantly different from
this one. It's lost its height. There's a bulge in the back. And that bulge has already started
to contribute to the narrowing of this canal. As we come down to the next level, we see the disc
is also lost at quite a bit of height. There's bulging, and then there's some ligament and
flavium. This black ligament has additionally pressed in, and it contributes to a drop of the
diameter of the canal. You can see it's quite a bit different from here to here versus a here
to here. This is the normal caliber of the canal. As we come down yet again, we see another disc.
Okay, it's lost height. And we see a bulge of the ligament. There's been settling.
Disbulge ligament contributing to significant to severe overall narrowing of the canal.
We come down here to the L4 or 5 space. We see what we call this thesis, a little
slip forward, not uncommon to see in folks. That also contributes to canal tightening.
We see a big ligament inflamed with a complete obliteration of the canal diameter. And so this
patient, when I saw him, was it had been reduced to essentially walking barely to the mailbox and
back at significant pain each trip. Couldn't walk the dog, couldn't play golf, couldn't do any of
those things. And he's been rendered essentially dependent on a front-wheel walker. He would
have to sit after about 60 feet and then rest, and he could get up and go again. And so because
of it, he's developed osteoporosis. He's developed cardiovascular disease. His overall body
habit has changed significantly. So this is what he presented with, this significant spinal stenosis.
So this is the sagittal cut. What I'm going to do is take you over to what is called the axial cut,
and it correlates to the sagittal cut. So I'm going to have you see both at first.
So you can see here, here's the slice right like so through. And right here, we see the
canal. I'll get a better pointer. We see the canal. We see the spinal cord. That's the dark gray.
The white is the cerebral spinal fluid around the canal. And right here, this cut, which is high,
you can see this one's way up here. There's no encroachment on the canal whatsoever. It's open,
and there's nothing pressing on the cord. They're the neural contents of the canal.
Now, as I bring down this axial cut, you'll see that little scout line on the left,
descending that purple line. You keep an eye on this canal. Okay. You can see there's a little
renal cyst. There's this aorta there coming down, coming down, starting to get more, a little more
narrow. And as we come to that first level of stenosis, you can see now that there's very little
CSF. There's a little bit of cerebral spinal fluid here. There's the, here's the terminal portion
of the cord. The nerve roots are starting, but it's starting to encroach. You can see how tight
it's getting. As we come down a little, again, follow this canal coming down here. You can see
the canals here. If we see light gray, that's cerebral spinal fluid. It opens up a little bit.
It's wide, wide, coming down, getting quite, quite narrow here. And you can see at this next cut,
slice right here, it's extremely narrow. This is epidural fat. Okay. The canal is now sandwiched
into this small space. And all that dark gray is essentially the lengthwise spaghettis of the
nerve roots that are compressed together by the joint, the facet joint, and the disc bulge there.
There's hardly any room at all. As we come down, as you recall, that's one of the least
affected levels. We come down again. You can see starting to get narrow, starting to get narrow,
extraordinarily narrow here. Again, at L34, super narrow. Come back up, a little more widening there
at L4 posteriorly, and at L5S1 near, I'm sorry, L45, near complete obliteration is what we call it,
of the interthical contents. There's simply no room for those nerves to get blood supply.
And as we come back down here, you can see that it opens up. 5.1 is a normal, normal segment.
Now, there's an interesting finding. I've never really seen it or heard about it,
discussed in the neurosurgical and neurologic literature. But it's a finding that I'll reveal
to you that is essentially a dead giveaway for symptomatology. If we see an MRI like this,
almost always, if we see this loop or a curve within a distal nerve root, we know that there is
tension actually on traction on the nerve roots that cause this additional redundant
loop of nerve root. Whenever we see that, the patient has to have symptoms. It's one of those
hallmarks. And of course, the patient does have symptoms. What does he say? He says,
I can't walk. When I sit down, I feel a lot better. So that's how to read the MRI. And it's really
important to be able to read this MRI because everything comes, all the options come based
on the MRI. Let me explain why or what the thinking was behind the traditional laminatechemia infusion.
What was the laminatechemia? What is it? So the lamina is essentially the roof of the canal.
You can see it right here. Here's the lamina. Here's the spinous process. This lamina provides the
bony architecture that the muscles attach to, all the ligaments of the spine, but they also
support and protect the canal from any injury. So the only option is previously surgically,
and it does work. It's one of the few lumbar spine surgeries, one of about three that really do have
a positive outcome. But the idea is to simply make an incision here in the bone, here in the bone,
either remove this half of the joint or not, but take the roof off and decompress, basically remove
all of the mass effect from one side of the canal so those nerve roots can breathe.
The problem is, as you can imagine, as we remove these spinous processes and we remove the lamina
that support everything, then the stability of the spine suffers significantly. It's kind of like
taking the laces out of a shoe. And as a result, over time, we found that that hyperdynamic movement
of the lumbar spine then was translated into increase wear at these discs, and these bony
bodies would slide around on each other and significant, if not severe degeneration would
then occur at a much more rapid rate. So I thought when consideration was given to fusion, how do
you how do you stop that hypermobility? The only way to do it is to come in and then put a piece
of bone or a spacer in the disc to further elevate the bones from each other and yet fuse them so
there's no more movement. That required instrumentation. It required a pair of pedical screws at each
location and then rods in order to secure those screws so that we could hold the substrate together
so that it would fuse up. It's interesting, a lot of people think that the rods and screws are
themselves what provides the structural support for the spine. That is not true. They are simply the
scaffolding used to hold these bony vertebrae in place so that the fusion, the bony connection
across essentially just like you had two bones that have fractured or a fracture of a bone,
they knit together with the fusion and then once that occurs the substrate, the strength of the
spine is entirely within the bony column, not within the pedical screws and the rods. So in Europe,
many countries in Europe and Japan and Asia, many countries, we actually they plan on a two-part
procedure. The rods and screws that go in and then they're removed once the fusion takes place.
So clearly taking the pressure off these nerves with a laminectomy is
helpful. The problem is it's a big surgery. It's usually around a, it's usually around a
three to five hour surgery depending on the number of levels. The recovery time in the
hospital is three to five days, about a week. The data reveals that about 20% of patients,
maybe a little more than 25% of patients have a complication such as a dural tear, a cut or an
interruption of that fluid filled sleeve that requires a very tenuous repair. Blood losses
can be significant, infection, but the total complication rate of laminectomy and fusion
in the literature some around 20, 25, even 27% in some studies. That's significant. Once you're
out of the hospital, the recovery time to really get back to normal activities is around two to
five months. And if you, in the surgical realm, you've talked to neighbors and friends, you know
that not everybody gets out with great success. So there's lots of room for improvement, as you
can imagine, and that difference in high quality outcomes and complexity heralded
an interest in minimally invasive approaches. And that's essentially where
interventionists such as myself have had enjoyed a real revolution in terms of the options available
to us. That's going to be the next segment. What do we do? What other than the big surgery can we
do for people who have severe disease in their spine or even moderate disease? So that'll be our
next phase. We're going to talk about what are the minimally invasive options for spinal stenosis
that exists between frank laminectomy and epidurals and physical therapy. And we've in the interim
developed something called interspinous spacing, which is probably the bulk of the treatments
that are available. And I'm going to explain some of those and what those products are. There's also
a couple other things. There's something called an ion facet screw and also mild minimally invasive
lumbar decompression. And then there's also a host of other interspinous spacers, which are a little
bit different, which are in the pipeline and currently being rolled out. So the first and
probably the oldest is something called a vertiflex interspinous spacer, a superior interspinous spacer.
It was the first of the of the bunch and it was an attempt to to provide a stabilization and a
instead of a resection of the ligament and flavor like we talked about during the laminectomy.
It's actually a stabilization that props open the spine. The idea is that most folks are getting
pain relief when they sit because of the change in the anatomy of the spine. Their lower dosis
or sway in the back gets less accentuated because their hips have moved forward. So the concept
is to put in a little spacer to essentially hold the spine in the sitting position when one stands
up and walks. And it preserves that space and allows the spine to move without the compression
of the nerve, protecting the nerve from the the sandwiching that occurs as we stand and walk.
This is what it looks like and you may see there's some other videos out there about it. I'll show
it to you a little bit. It's a it's a fold. It looks kind of like an X-wing and these two wings
that brown wings fold down touching each other when we install it and we simply place it into the
spine, the inner spine of space like so, thus holding the the spine in the open position
when we are standing and walking. Otherwise what would happen is that there would be collapse
and we would simply sandwich and start to pinch that that segment. So this holds the segment in
extension preventing that collapse when you walk. There's some caveats to this and the main caveat
to this is the way it was designed is it's it's thin and the thinness sadly this portion right here
it's the thinness can erode into the bone over time and one of the things that we didn't necessarily
anticipate was how this would work over hundreds of thousands or millions of oscillations and
repetitions and so in about 50 percent of people it seems to erode into the bone or have what we
call subsidence where the bone settles down around the implant and then we get the spinal
stenosis again. So that's the main concern with the verte flex inner spinal spacer but for a good
at least half of the portion of patients it doesn't really do that and it opens it enough
that you really need nothing more. The secondary solution was built on the shoulders of that
and it's called a minute man. It's made by spinal simplicity and it's another attempt to again
hold open the inner spinal space. You can see it looks kind of like a bolt it's put in
pre-cutaneously from the side locked in place with an expansion on this side you can see it kind
of looks like a drywall expansion bolt. The good thing about this is it largely obviates the spinal
subsidence it holds on to the spinous process on both sides and it it further stabilizes the spine
so there's minimal segmental motion segmental movement and wearing on the segment. It's an
improvement I think nevertheless I still think there's some caveats. Both of these carry with it
a small risk of spinal fracture. I think this one since its sandwich is down on the spinous process
actually increases the risk of spinal fracture a small amount maybe doubles it from about two
percent to four percent but that's the minute man simplicity spinal simplicity inner spinal
spacer an improvement I think. Next an ion facet stabilizing screw this is you can see is
and I'm doing this in reverse it's a small screw that goes into the facet joint you can see it right
there very tiny it's placed pre-cutaneously and what we do is we place the patient on the table
we put him into into lordosis that means stretching of the spine and separation and then as we we
hold him in that position on the table we simply place these two little screws into the facet
joints fusing the facet joints in this open position and thus opening up the frame and opening up the
canal so it remains open and patent again another attempt to prove or hold the position of the spine
when one stands and walks subsequent iterations of these devices we're all going to be focused on
moving the implant forward where it's stabilized without the the lever arm of the spinous process
and maybe even adjustable over time there are a few in the works that allow for percutaneous
increase of the stretch or advancement that can be done in the office for example
there are additionally some that focus on resection of the ligament this is principally the mild
approach and what this works on is if you can see the ligament and flamin I'll show you on this MRI
what I'm talking about the ligament and flamin is this bulge of black that you see right here
and that bulge of black indents the tico sac and it's really on this particular MRI quite severe
and you can see over here on the cross sectional one that black ligament right here if that can be
resected then you can see that there'd be quite a bit of of opening of the canal and quite a bit
of patency restored the challenge of this particular approach is the phone it's mild
minimally invasive lumbar decompression but it's also mild in that it's not an extreme procedure
and the ability to get deep within the spine safely is limited by that that limit of safety
and so it's difficult because the the way in which we go we use fluoroscopic guidance we can't see
the ligament we can't see the nerve roots it's not MRI we can simply go by feel and then also
by the radiology itself so I think it places a little increased risk for injury to nerve roots
possibly I do this procedure while patients are awake so that they can talk to me through the
procedure and tell me what they feel I think that's a safer way to go I don't think it's
nearly as dangerous as an open spine surgery with multiple complications or a complication
rate of around 25 percent I think the complication mild is less than 1 percent still but nevertheless
these kinds of complications are serious and when they happen and they happen to you
or if they happen to my patient then it's a major deal so
that's the the lay of the land for spinal stenosis presently this is 2013 march
there's several things coming there are a few other treatments that'll be pharmacologic implants
or pharmacologic drug alluding devices within the spinal canal which will be coming that may help
there may be a ways to open and secure with even more minimally invasive approaches there may be
ways to file down the the anterior part of the facet joint so it has less mass effect on the
canal all percutaneously nevertheless I think we've got great results from some of these approaches
I don't think they fit everybody but nevertheless the lay of the land is dramatically different than
it was say just even five years ago when just a few of these things existed lastly I hope you've
enjoyed this I hope it's been illustrative illustrated some of the things that are available
thank you for your time and attention
Four key factors might be causing your pelvis to tilt forward, leading to an anterior pelvic tilt.
In this video, we'll dissect each of these culprits and give you strategies to address them.
But before we dive in, let's take a moment to understand why.
Why should you care about anterior pelvic tilt and why should you want to fix it?
Well, our pelvis serves as the bedrock for our spines and upper bodies and sets the stage for
all upright actions of our hips. So when this foundation tilts excessively forward,
it's like a domino effect impacting other segments of the body.
Take tight hamstrings, for instance, a common side effect of anterior pelvic tilt.
This issue is due to the forward rotation of the pelvis, yanking the attached hamstring
into a constant state of tension. A dysfunction such as this will restrict movement,
even simple tasks like bending over to pick up something.
Not convinced? Let's put it to the test.
Force your pelvis into an exaggerated forward tilt,
by sticking your butt out and arching your back, then maintaining this posture,
attempt a hip hinge until you feel maximum tension in your hamstrings.
Take note of your hip movement range.
Now, reset your pelvis by tensing your glutes,
bracing your core as if you're preparing for an abdominal punch.
Try the hip hinge again.
If done correctly, you'll see a noticeable increase in range of motion before the hamstring
tension sets in. Eye-opening, isn't it? Can you see why restriction,
resulting from anterior pelvic tilt, could be detrimental to your performance
and could hike your risk of injury?
Another major reason to rectify anterior pelvic tilt is the undue strain it places on our
spines. The forward tilt of the pelvis forces our spine into a high-pair extension,
compressing the spinal discs and irritating the structures on the back of the spine,
known as facet joints. Needless to say, maintaining the state for extended periods
can compromise our spinal integrity.
Do you find your back tiring or aching easily during or after physical activities,
even everyday ones like walking?
Antero-pulvic tilt might be a likely suspect.
Numerous studies established the link between lower back pain and anterior pelvic tilt.
Tight hamstrings and lower back pain are just two of the many issues rooted in anterior pelvic tilt.
But, as we mentioned at the start, there are four main factors that lead to the
misalignment of the pelvis, so let's get into them.
A chief culprit behind anterior pelvic tilt is inflexible hips,
specifically the hip flexors located on the front side.
This is largely attributed to excessive sitting and other sedentary behaviour.
There is no debating that we as a society sit more than is healthy.
From studying, working, eating, commuting, socialising to unwinding,
being seated is our default posture.
When you sit for extended periods with your hips in a static flexed position,
your hip flexors stiffen and contract in a phenomenon known as adaptive shortening.
This subsequently yanks at the front of the pelvis, rotating it forward into an anterior pelvic tilt.
Now, it's essential to remember that your hip flexors are not just the iliopsoas muscles,
they are also hip flexors in your quads.
We'll discuss why this knowledge is vital later in the video.
If you're uncertain about the flexibility of your hip flexors, here's a quick test you can try.
Lay on a table face up and slide your hips down until they're right at the edge.
Then pull one knee to your chest, allowing the opposite leg to dangle off the table's front edge.
If your hip flexors are flexible, your knee will align with or hang below the table top,
and your shin will drop straight down.
However, if your hip flexors are tight, your knee will hover above the table top,
and your shin will swing in front of the vertical line.
If the test reveals tight hip flexors, there are a few things you can do.
The simplest and most effective solution is to decrease sitting and increase moving.
Using a standing disc, for instance, can subtract hours of sitting from your daily routine.
I use this affordable collapsible one from Amazon.
It converts any table top into a standing disc and stows away into a compact portable unit.
I'll include links in the description below.
You could even consider a treadmill disc, which I'm experimenting with currently.
However, if that's too radical for you, aim to alter your sitting position
frequently to keep your hip flexors in check.
Here are a few innovative ways to switch up your sitting routine.
Besides reducing sitting time and regularly changing your seated position,
research shows that hip flexor stretches significantly improves hip extension capabilities
and enter a pelvic tilt.
Here's how to stretch your hip flexors.
Take a kneeling lunge position and implement the midline stability sequence
I demonstrated at the start of the video.
That is, squeeze your glutes and tighten your abdominals.
Upon doing this, you should instantly feel a stretch in the front of the hip.
Extend the stretch slightly by pushing forward through your hip.
Ensure your core remains engaged and your glutes activated throughout.
Otherwise, you'll lose midline stability and move through your spine instead of your hips,
which is not what we're aiming for.
To intensify this exercise and target the hip flexors in the quad,
prop your back leg up onto a platform.
A good rule of thumb is to spend one minute on the stretch for each hip
per hour you sit daily.
The second step in our four step process is to enhance core stability.
This is vital because the core muscles are directly attached to the pelvis and spine,
therefore influencing their stability and alignment.
When these muscles are weak and lack endurance,
especially the abdominals on the front side,
they tend to lose their contraction and lengthen during movement,
which allows the pelvis to rotate forward.
This issue is worsened when the hip flexors are tight,
pulling the pelvis in the same direction.
As a result, the spine tends to hyper extend and in severe cases,
you may notice the ribcage flaring.
The goal is to build strength and endurance in these core stabilizing muscles
so that they can maintain their contraction to ensure stability
and proper alignment of the pelvis and spine during movement.
This point was validated by 2021 study,
which found that significantly enhancing core isometric endurance
over six weeks considerably reduced anterior pelvic tilt in subjects.
So what is isometric core endurance?
This is a crucial question as it suggests the type of core exercises
we should select to address anterior pelvic tilt.
Isometric refers to a muscular contraction
where the muscle neither lengthens nor shortens.
In the case of the core, this implies a stiffening action without any movement.
So exercises like sit-ups, for instance,
would be unsuitable as they shorten the abdominals
and cause the spine to move out of a neutral stable position.
Sit-ups also activate the hip flexors,
which we've already identified as being overactive
in individuals with anterior pelvic tilt.
Hence, making them even more active would be counterproductive.
Two exercises more suited to the goal of isometric core stability
are the plank and side plank.
To perform a plank, assume a push-up position
but rest on your elbows instead of your hands.
The core must be braced throughout.
That is, abs tight, rib cage drawn down with a glute squeezed.
The aim is to maintain rigidity in the body's midsection
without any sagging or twisting.
A perfectly flat back is ideal.
There's no need to hold the plank for an extended period.
Instead, break each set into six to eight reps
of 20 to 30 second holds with five second rests between reps.
These short rest periods allow blood and oxygen to reach the muscles,
which is essential for combating fatigue
and maintaining proper technique.
Increasing endurance in this exercise is as simple as doing more sets.
In terms of the side plank, also known as the side bridge,
we suggest starting with a modified version on the knees first
as it's slightly easier.
Begin by laying on your side with knees bent to 90 degrees,
brace the core and extend the hips until your body
from the knees to the shoulders is stable and forms a straight line.
Hold this position for 10 to 20 seconds.
Take a five second rest and repeat for six to eight reps
per set, per side.
Once this becomes too easy, you can progress to the full side plank
with legs extended and support provided by the feet.
The third step concerns the relationship between the pelvis and the feet.
As I've emphasized numerous times on this channel,
our feet form the foundation for the entire body.
If this foundational support is compromised,
the structure above it also becomes compromised.
But unlike a building, our body intelligently compensates
for a weak foundation instead of collapsing.
One such compensation method is the anterior rotation of the pelvis.
This connection was found in several studies where participants
were placed on inward slanting wedges,
forcing their feet into overpronation.
The researchers found that when the feet collapse,
it leads to an internal rotation of the shin bones,
causing the fire bones to rotate inwards.
Both of these rotations then force the pelvis
into an anterior pelvic tilt.
One of these studies also found that their fix
didn't stop at the pelvis but continued upstream,
causing the lower back to hip extend and the upper back to round.
These findings underline the importance of building strong feet
for maintaining good posture.
Now various methods can improve foot strength and stability.
The simplest one is through the use of minimally supportive footwear
like barefoot shoes.
Because these shoes lack significant arch support or cushioning,
they encourage the intrinsic foot muscles to perform most of the support of work
and thereby strengthen the feet.
We have several videos on our channel discussing barefoot shoes
and their benefits in depth, so be sure to check them out.
Over and above wearing minimally supportive footwear,
adding foot strengthening exercises into your training regimen is also recommended.
One such exercise is the supinated heel raises.
Start with your toes pointed straight.
Actively press your toes into the ground to start raising your heels
while simultaneously attempting to make them face each other.
Ensure that the toes, especially the big toe,
stay pressed against the ground.
When I hold this position, it appears as if the foot is wound tight.
This tension through the foot creates stability.
From this position, lower the heels back down to the ground with control
and repeat.
A helpful tip is to actively squeeze your glutes as you raise your heels.
This helps engage your glutes in stabilizing the lower limbs.
Performing this exercise correctly,
your toes will feel like they're spreading apart during each heel lift.
You can initially perform this exercise with assistance,
eventually progressing to do it independently.
The goal is to stay balanced and in control on the descent
and become strong and powerful through the foot on the ascent.
So, ascend quickly, pause at the top, then descend slowly.
To increase difficulty, you can slow down the tempo on the descending portion
of the heel raises or perform them while holding weighted objects.
As you can see, my team and I are laser focused on addressing
the fundamental aspects of human performance,
such as building a strong physical foundation through the feet.
This serves as a primary defense against injury
and paves the way for continuous progression towards our physical goals.
After all, how can one progress if you're constantly injured, right?
So, we've taken the value you get from this YouTube channel
and amplified it in our classes over at the Barefoot Strength Academy.
Click the link below to sample our classes and let's move better together.
The final part of our four-step anti-republic till protocol
involves your choice of footwear, specifically avoiding shoes with a raised heel.
A 2013 literature review on 20 studies examining the body posture changes
while wearing high heeled shoes discovered that standing in raised heels
induces a forward rotation of the pelvis.
Another study that analyzed the effects of wearing raised heel shoes during walking
revealed that such footwear prompts the hip flexors and quads
to work 23% and 200% harder, respectively.
Recall from step one that these are the muscles often found to be chronically tight
in those with anti-republic tilt.
So, imagine what happens when these muscles have to work significantly harder
while walking in raised heels.
They become even tighter, worsening the effects of anti-republic tilt.
Raised heels in reality serve no functional purpose in our modern lifestyle.
They were originally invented in the 15th century to help soldiers
feet stay secure in stirrups while horseback riding.
This practical invention later turned into a trend among royalty who wore them
to appear taller and display their elevated status.
This outdated trend unfortunately still persists today.
The obvious solution is to avoid shoes with raised heels and instead choose
flat or zero drop footwear.
This design feature common to barefoot shoes is another reason I recommend them
over all other types of shoes.
You'll find links to the ones we've tried and tested in the description below.
If you found this video helpful, do check out our deep dive in how to fix tight hamstrings here
or our video on how to fix bunions here.
Back pain is one of the biggest reasons we seek medical care, and low back pain is listed
as a leading cause of disability worldwide. But there's a lot of misinformation out there,
and along with it, a lot of bad treatments.
So today, I want to bring up five things you should know about back pain.
One, back pain isn't just limited to the spine. Our back is made of bones called vertebrae that
run from your neck to your tailbone. These vertebrae form the spinal column, which houses the
spinal cord. Each vertebrae is also connected to the others by ligaments. Between each vertebrae
are discs, which provide cushion and help absorb and distribute pressure. Within this structure
of connections are also joints, muscles, tendons, and nerves. But our back isn't held up by just
the spine. In fact, a lot of that work is done by our core, which includes our abdominal muscles,
low back muscles, hips, and glutes, and pelvic floor. The muscles in our core take pressure
off the rest of the spine. Every day, we put all kinds of pressure on our backs when we walk,
stand, carry our groceries, lift boxes, and even when we sit. So it's not only spinal pressure,
but torn muscles or slipped discs that could be contributing to back pain. But pain itself is
even more complex. Often it's how pain signals are processed in the nerves or in the brain that
perpetuates the pain. Other factors like stress and anxiety can amplify pain. This complexity
is why treating back pain can be so frustrating and why it's enticing to seek out all sorts of
medically suspect care, which leads me to two. Chiropractic treatment is not backed by science.
Going to chiropractors for spinal manipulation is very popular, especially in the United States.
But a study that looked at 45 systematic reviews found no evidence supporting chiropractic treatment
as effective for any medical condition. I'm not denying that people who visit chiropractors
sometimes feel better after a session, but studies suggest that the comfort and relief from being
touched is most likely a placebo effect. This is also a reminder that chiropractic treatment
can sometimes be dangerous. There are people who have suffered vascular strokes after neck
adjustments. Three, imaging techniques like MRI or x-ray don't always help with diagnosing back
pain. For instance, you can be in a lot of pain and get an MRI showing a pristine spine with nothing
out of the ordinary, or you could have no pain whatsoever, and an MRI could turn up abnormalities
like a bulging disc. And what's more, sometimes when you do have pain, an abnormality on MRI
may have nothing to do with it. Additionally, an MRI doesn't always capture what's happening
with your muscles or tell us how pain is being processed in the brain. There are instances
when imaging helps to allow a serious problem, especially after trauma or an accident, or if
there are red flags, meaning warning signs for cancer or troubling neurological symptoms.
But for the majority of people with back pain, imaging has actually been associated with worse
patient outcomes and unnecessary surgeries. Speaking of surgeries, four, back surgeries can
sometimes do more harm than good. Researchers analyzed studies on two types of spine surgery,
lumbar spine fusion and lumbar spine decompression. They found that neither of these surgeries
was more effective than non-surgical treatment, which I'll get into in a bit. Finally,
five, physical therapy is a really good option for back pain. A well-designed physical therapy
program can often be very effective at treating acute and chronic back pain, but it does take
work. Good physical therapy involves not just assessments, but also a structured home exercise
program, which you need to do regularly. There are also multidisciplinary clinics that can offer
multimodal therapy like medications, physical therapy, and sometimes injections. What I'm saying
is this, there isn't always an easy fix for back pain. The solutions take time and sometimes need
a multi-pronged approach. For now, you can show your back some love by staying active and doing
exercises that strengthen your muscles, including your core.
You will never walk again.
There was the first message I heard from the doctor when I woke up in the hospital bed.
He looked at me with an arrogant look on his face and to me it seems he was enjoying the
moment telling me this horrible message you got a spinal cord injury I was confused what is a
spinal cord injury I asked him and he remembered he grabbed the pen and he pushed it into my leg
he said can you feel this I said no can you lift your legs once again no this will be permanent
you will never walk again you will never feel your legs again and then he left me lying there
in the hospital bed just one day before I was just a record of a normal 90 year old guy working at
the bill farm enjoying life and I'd like to hang out with my friends sure I'm a competitive guy
and sport-minded guy but so socially my social contacts are also very important to me what I
said it was just a normal normal Saturday me working at the bill farm driving home when I
neared a junction I saw a car nearing in the distance but I had a lot of time to cross the
road but I'm in my own my curiosity I turned my head seeing where this car went and at the
moment I turned my head I felt that my front wheel hit the pavement and I tumbled forwards
in a split seconds everything turned black I hit a utility box and I remembered that some
paramedics said you broke your neck you will never ever walk again this message was five years ago
so I went to rehabilitation there was this one goal left in life and it was to walk again to me
it seems I lost everything in life without the prospect of ever walking again there was for me
with no point in living so you can imagine how frustrated the first several months were of
rehabilitation day in day out week after week I was confronted with the bitter truth that my
body wasn't able to do what I wanted to do the most so I had to deal with the one disappointment
after after another all those disappointments made me angry at some point in time the older
disappointments made me so angry that I didn't look that I didn't look at myself in the mirror
again I was scared from that those guy of those guy those guy in the mirror after time the coaches
of the rehabilitation center asked me to formulate some goals yes of course easily easy for me walking
but unfortunately they convinced me to come up with some better realistic schools the first
goals were for me to go home and become the independent I want to show the world that I
can that I can be independent also in my wheelchair we're gonna show you accepting a lot of accepting
an injury which is what willing to accept is as hard is as hard as hitting a utility box with
your moped then the second goals came finish my education go to work luckily with my internship
I get I get work I get a contract to go work over there so becoming independent became reality and
to prove you that independence I were this me signing my education with only a half year of delay
this my second contract from a work where I still work and the really good goal to make
independent is my ride with new wems so one to zero for this guy in a wheelchair
but I was still eager from some goals but I said early I'm a sport-minded guy and I don't know if
you ever heard of the hand bike battle that cycling up with your arms on a mountain 21 kilometers
and within distance of two kilometers of altitude the coach of the rehabilitation to ask me for
to join their team in a split second I said yes but how sorry I was to say yes there was the
first training just to fly over 3% not that easy it's easy but and all may and with four attempts
I was so exhausted that they can't continue the training anymore the coach had to me oh Danny
there's lots of work to do to give you an image there was the challenge but nobody you were
dead I was I was skipping forward to the finish oh sorry oh skipping forward to the finish and it
was incredible everybody was cheering my name screaming but every every fire in my whole body
wants to stop I was so enthusiastic with 20 long kilometers of increase but I was nearing the finish
and I was so fast I was faster than an African imagined and I was over there and something
magical happens up at the mountain I believed over there there was no mountain too high for me
that can overcome to push myself to the life goal to ever walk again he showed it to the zero for me
some day of some few years ago a friend of mine asked me if I was ever heard of an exoskeleton
I said yes I heard of it but I don't know what it is scientists created and some kind of Ironman suit
that pair less people can wear to walk so I went to Google and I saw the price 100,000 euros so
there was a not a battle ahead because insurance companies doesn't cover the cost but I was still
eager to ever walk again and the message I want to give you today is that how impossible the goal
is never give up never give up and never ever let you tell let tell you that something is impossible
and I remembered that a doctor said to me you will never ever walk again
yeah
When I was a teenager, I know it looks long time ago now, I had an injury on my ankle while
practicing judo and I broke my ankle.
I had to be hospitalized, have a small surgery with a long cast for two and a half months
and then after physical therapy in about four or five months I was able to run and jump again
like nothing had happened.
So despite the frustration, the physical limitation and my mom's desperation for that injury,
I knew that this was a temporary event and that with time I would have gotten better.
Unfortunately there are other kinds of injuries like the ones that affect our nervous system
that are not temporary, that leave patients with permanent and often severe disabilities.
So our nervous system is not very good to repair itself and despite this progress in
medicine we still cannot have effective treatment to repair the nervous system when it's damaged.
One of the reasons for this is that we do not have a full understanding of the biology
of nerve regeneration and degeneration.
So I would like to share with you today two entwined ideas.
One innovative approach that we might have that may might exploit in the future to treat
nerve injuries and the other the enormous potential that arise when we look at nature
in most basic forms and how they have solved biological problem that can inform us on new
medical approaches.
So let me start with the metaphor.
Imagine you build this beautiful electric circuit with very long cables that get electricity
to very distant villages and now imagine there is a storm and one of the cable gets
severed and the village is without electricity.
You have two options.
One get a brand new cable from the circuit down to the village which is very time consuming
and in the meantime the village is suffering.
Second, you go there and repair the cable when it's broken which is a more intuitive
way of repair and more effective with the minimal loss for the village.
Now let's bring this analogy to the human body.
Our brain is like an electric circuit where we have billions of neutrons that communicate
with electrical current to very distant villages which are our muscles, organ and tissues and
they do that through tiny cables called axons.
Each neuron has its own axons and this axon can be very long, sometimes even one meter
as in a shatic nerve.
This axon normally travels together in bundles in structure that we call nerves.
So each nerve will have 50 of 100 axons.
Now similarly to a storm that will sever an electric circuit, an injury that will cut
one axon or a group of axon will interrupt the communication between the central and
the village.
And this is probably one of the most dramatic of this is FET is seen during spinal cord
injury where an injury in the axons in our spine will cause an interdaptal communication
between the brain and the organ and the tissue downstream.
And the patient becomes paraplegic which means loses sensitivity to the lower limbs or even
worse tetraplegic if the injury is really high in the neck which means losing sensitivity
and movement of the lower limb, torso and upper limbs.
I think it's hard to overemphasize the physical and emotional impact on the patients and their
family where these injuries occur.
Now the human neurons do something surprising when we cut their axons.
They tend to do something counterintuitive.
They try to regrow the full length like if you were trying to rebuild the full line from
the circuit to the village.
But you might wonder now why a skilled neurosurgeon could not stitch together the individual axon.
And this is indeed a very promising avenue in neurosurgery but there are still a lot
of limitations.
The largest of one is the actual dimension of the axon.
I told you that these are tiny cable.
The diameter of an axon is about 100 or 1,000 times that of a millimeter.
And to give you a more realistic reference point, in one of your air, you can probably
fit about 50 axons.
So the neurosurgeon might probably stitch together the tissues surrounding the axon.
Maybe the nerve itself but not the individual axon as it would be desirable to have a full
functional recovery.
But now imagine if we had a magical glue that will allow us to do exactly that, to stitch
back together one broken axon.
Wouldn't that be amazing?
And this is where we can learn by looking at nature.
Over 50 years ago, scientists found that some animals including the crayfish, the earthworm,
the leech, and the sea slug, they were able to spontaneously repair their injured axon
by stitching them back together in a process that is called axonal fusion.
Isn't that amazing?
But how do they do it?
How do they have the superpower?
What molecule do they use?
This has remained a mystery for five decades.
And the reason is that we do not have yet tools to interrogate the genome and the DNA
and find the molecules in these organisms.
However, about 10 years ago, a game-changing event happened.
A combination between engineering and microscopy allowed us to sever one single axon in a different
species for which our tools in biology and knowledge in the genome is phenomenal, is
limitless.
And this is a small animal, is a nematode, a round worm, the scientific name is synodaptitis
elegans, we call it C elegans, or simply the worm.
And this is like one millimeter long, the size of a comma or one of the book you're
just reading or your abstract book today.
And I leave everybody in our garden.
What my lab and other lab in the world found, that these animals, some axons in these animals
also have that capacity to repair themselves spontaneously.
Now you can imagine this provided an enormous experimental platform that will allow us to
interrogate how they do it, because now we have tools.
And in fact, my laboratory together with the lab of Professor Yishijin at the University
of California in San Diego and Professor Ben Bobilevich at the Technion Institute in Israel
have identified what are the molecules that mediate this process.
And one of the most important molecules that mediate this are called fusogens.
These function exactly as a biological glue that allow this broken axon to get back together.
But how about us?
Do we have fusogens?
Yes, we do.
And so do other organisms in the animal kingdom and viruses.
However, in us, they do not function in axonal repair, not yet.
But they function in other essential processes, such as the formation of the placenta, our
muscles, our bones, some cells in the eyes.
And the way they function, even in that case, as a glue, they fuse entire cells together.
Okay?
However, we now know these molecules.
We know that there is a group of molecules that have a phenomenal property.
They can repair axons.
This is like having a brand new tool.
And we now need to learn how to use it, what we can do with it, where does the potential
of this molecule end?
And so my lab is currently using fusogens from different species and see if we now can
repair a median axon with the idea of providing the surgeon with that glue that is missing.
Injuries are involuntary, so we will never be able to fully prevent them.
Being able to repair a single axon is a major goal in neurosurgery.
And I think it's a reach.
And when we will be able to do that, we will be one step closer to make this permanent
injury into temporary ones.
That is a significant and unfortunate trend in the developed world to forget how much
basic science can inform us a more developed organism like us.
So I would like to leave you with the thought that if we keep an open mind as a society
and medical community, and we are willing to learn from very simple organisms such as
a worm, we might find ourselves not only in position to learn more about nature, but
also to find cure for diseases that are currently uncutable.
Thank you.
So I'm here today surrounded by all these fruits and vegetables, because these are the subjects
of my experiments.
Now bear with me for just a second, but about a decade ago my team started to rethink how
we make materials for reconstructing damaged or diseased human tissues.
And we made the totally unexpected discovery that plants could be used for this purpose.
In fact, we invented a way to take these plants and strip them of all their DNA and
their cells, leaving behind natural fibers.
And these fibers could then be used as a scaffold for reconstructing living tissue.
Now I know this is a little weird, but in our very first proof-of-concept experiment,
we took an apple, carved it into the shape of a human ear, and then we took that ear-shaped
scaffold, sterilized it, processed it, and coaxed human cells to grow inside of it.
We then took the next step and implanted it, and we were able to demonstrate that the scaffolds
stimulated the formation of blood vessels, allowing the heart to keep them alive.
So not too long after these discoveries were taking place, I was at home cooking asparagus
for dinner, and after cutting the ends off, I was noticing that these stalks were full
of these micro-channeled, vascular bundles, and it really reminded me of a whole body
of bioengineering effort aimed at treating spinal cord injury.
Up to half a million people per year suffer from this type of injury, and the symptoms
can range from pain and numbness to devastating traumas that lead to a complete loss of motor
function and independence.
And in these forms of paralysis, there's no accepted treatment strategy.
But one possible solution might be the use of a scaffold that has micro-channels which
may guide regenerating neurons.
So could we use the asparagus and its vascular bundles to repair spinal cord?
This is a really dumb idea.
First of all, humans aren't plants.
Our cells have not evolved to grow on plant polymers, and plant tissues have no business
being found in your spinal cord.
And secondly, ideally these types of scaffolds should disappear over time, leaving behind
natural, healthy tissue.
But plant-based scaffolds don't do that, because we lack the enzymes to break them down.
Funnily enough, these properties were exactly why we were having so much success.
Over the course of many experiments, we were able to demonstrate that the inertness of
plant tissue is exactly why it's so biocompatible.
In a way, the body almost doesn't even see it, but regenerating cells benefit from its
shape and stability.
Now this is all well and good, but I constantly felt this weight of doubt when it came to
thinking about spinal cords.
So many scientists were using materials from traditional sources, like synthetic polymers
and animal products, even human cadavers.
I felt like a complete outsider with no real right to work on such a hard problem.
But because of this doubt, I surrounded myself with neurosurgeons and clinicians, biochemists
and bioengineers, and we started to plan experiments.
The basic idea is that we would take an animal and anesthetize it, expose its spinal cord,
and sever it in the thoracic region, rendering the animal a paraplegic.
We would then implant an asparagus scaffold between the severed ends of the spinal cord
to act as a bridge.
This is crucially important.
We are only using asparagus.
We're not adding stem cells, or electrical stimulation, or exoskeletons, or physical
therapy or pharmaceuticals.
We're simply investigating if the microchannels in the scaffold alone are enough to guide
the regeneration of neurons.
And here are the main results.
In this video, you can see an animal about eight weeks after being paralyzed.
You can see she can't move her back legs and she can't lift herself up.
Now I know how difficult this video is to watch.
My team struggled every day with these types of experiments, and we constantly asked ourselves
why we were doing this, until we started to observe something extraordinary.
This is an animal that received an implant.
Now she's not walking perfectly, but she's moving those back legs, and she's even starting
to lift herself up.
And on a treadmill, you can see those legs moving in a coordinated fashion.
These are crucial signs of recovery.
Now we still have a lot of work to do, and there are a lot of questions to answer.
But this is the first time anyone has shown that plant tissues can be used to repair such
a complex injury.
Even so, we've been sitting on this data for over five years.
Doubt drove us to repeat these experiments again and again, to the point of almost bankrupting
my lab.
But I kept pushing because I knew these results could be the start of something extraordinary.
And what's just as exciting is that my company is now translating these discoveries into
the clinic, into the real world.
This technology has just been designated a breakthrough medical device by the FDA.
And this designation means that right now, we're in the midst of planning human clinical
trials set to begin in about two years.
So I'd like to show you a prototype of one of our state-of-the-art spinal cord implants.
It's still made from asparagus and contains all of those microchannels.
And you can see that it moves and bends and has the same feel as human tissue.
And you know, I think the real innovation is that we're now able to design or program
the architecture and structure of plant tissues in such a way that they could direct cell growth
to address an unmet medical need.
As scientists, we spend our lives living on a knife's edge.
On the one hand, it's our job to fundamentally broaden the horizons of human knowledge.
But at the same time, we're trained to doubt, to doubt our data, to doubt our experiments,
to doubt our own conclusions.
We spend our lives crushed under the weight of constant, unrelenting, never-ending anxiety,
uncertainty, and self-doubt.
And this is something I really struggle with.
But I think almost every scientist can tell you about the time they ignored those doubts
and did the experiment that would never work.
And the thing is, every now and then, one of those experiments works out.
The challenge we face is that while doubt can be destructive to your mental health,
it's also the reason why scientific rigor is such a potent tool for discovery.
It forces us to ask the difficult questions and repeat experiments.
Nothing about that is easy.
And often, it becomes our responsibility to bear the burden of the hard and sometimes
heart-wrenching experiment.
This ultimately leads to the creation of new knowledge, and in some really rare cases,
the type of innovation that just might change a person's life.
Thank you.
It's a pleasure to welcome everyone to this community conversation on what's new in spinal
cord repair, spinal cord injury repair.
I'm Judy Ellis.
I'm professor of neurology here at the University of British Columbia.
I'm director of NeuroEthics Canada.
And one of the principal investigators on a new grant called Men the Gap that you'll
be hearing about today.
But today's session is not only about this new grant.
It's about far more so about the whole landscape of spinal cord injury today from its history
through clinical care, through innovations in science, and through the importance of
engaging all stakeholders, scientists, researchers, clinicians, patients in the spinal cord injury
repair journey.
This is our 16th community conversation that's hosted by NeuroEthics Canada.
And our goal through these community conversations, whether we're in person or we are on Zoom
as we are now, is to bring science and ethics about the central nervous system to the public,
to patients in an informal and really discursive sort of way.
So our panelists will speak only briefly and we will leave plenty of time for this open
discussion with our audience who are here today with us.
Our goal through NeuroEthics Canada, aside from these community conversations is to conduct
research that directly aligns human values with neuroscience, the science of the central
nervous system.
And we're just delighted to partner with Men the Gap today in its first community conversation,
which I hope will be one of many over the coming six years of this very large project.
Let me acknowledge the lands on which we are gathered here today, where UBC is on the traditional
territory of the Musqueam Squamish and Slewa Tooth people, and this is also where NeuroEthics
Canada and Men the Gap and our clinical sites are so lucky to be able to provide the care
that we do, do the research that we do and play and thrive.
We do have panelists and participants from all across Canada today, and sometimes we
have participants from around the world as far as New Zealand, I haven't checked the
participant list yet, and so I really want to take the opportunity to recognize the lands
and the knowledge of all of our predecessors who share their space and their knowledge
with us.
I want to thank the University of British Columbia, NeuroEthics Canada, Marianne Bacani
for bringing us together and organizing these very special events.
I'd like to acknowledge the North Family Foundation, who is an unrelenting supporter of all the
work that we do.
Other internal programs of the University of British Columbia, including the President's
Office, as well as Men the Gap.
So our schedule for the next 85 minutes or so is as follows.
We have four wonderful panelists who I will introduce in just a moment.
We will hear about the history of spinal cord injury treatment, advances in clinical care,
new experimental approaches to spinal cord injury repair, and insights into engaging
people with lived experience in the spinal cord injury journey.
They will each have under seven minutes to present, and they're going to cover their
topics dutifully in that amount of time.
So you can imagine how excited they are and challenged they are to be sharing their knowledge
with you in such a short amount of time, but as I mentioned, we really want to privilege
the time to speak and engage with all of you who have joined us today.
We are recording.
I hope you are all okay with that.
Please do take note of that.
We will invite you to use the chat box as well as the Q&A function on Zoom to post your
questions.
We will read them to the panelists and share them.
They will respond.
Do note that the chat box as well as the panelists will be recorded.
So please take note of that when you're using those functions.
Participants are muted on entry, and Marianne and I will monitor the Q&A in the chat box.
So without further ado, it's my great pleasure and with great gratitude that I introduce Dr.
Karim Fawoud, who is Professor and Canada Research Chair for Spinal Cord Injury at the
Department of Physical Therapy in the Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine at the University
of Alberta.
He's a member of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute and co-director and editor
of the Open Data Commons Spinal Cord Injury.
His research focuses on rewiring neuronal circuits after spinal cord injury and his work promotes
neuroplasticity, a regeneration of injured nerve tissue with the ultimate goal of promoting
functional recovery.
Dr. Fawoud, thank you so much for being here with us.
Dr. Townsend is a colleague of mine for many, many years now here in Vancouver.
He's a clinical professor in the Division of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and
Associate Head of Education in the Department of Medicine.
Her expertise is in spinal cord injury and she also studies ventilator dependency resulting
from paralysis of the diaphragm.
She's an investigator at the International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries and is
an attending physician on the Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation Program at GF Strong
Rehabilitation Centre.
Dr. Townsend, thank you for taking time out of your busy clinical schedule to be with
us.
Dr. Madden, John Madden is Director of Advanced Materials and Process Engineering Laboratory
and Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at UBC.
His lab does research on actuators, sensors and other innovative devices based on smart
materials.
Much of Dr. Madden's research combines electrical chemistry and emerging materials to explore
new applications, fabrication processes and devices.
He is indeed principal investigator of the new Men the Gap Grant, an international, leading
an international team that seeks to repair the spinal cord after injury.
And I might point out that Dr. Madden also has a recent publication in Science, which
is a milestone for those of us in the research community.
Congratulations on that success, Dr. Madden.
Barry Monroe, Mr. Monroe is Chief Development Officer of the Canadian and American Spinal
Research Organization, which was established in 1984 to fund targeted research to maximize
functional recovery and cure paralysis caused by spinal cord injury.
He also currently holds a position of Treasurer for the North American Spinal Cord Injury
Consortium, which is a community led organization with the mission of bringing unified achievements
in research, care, cure and policy by supporting collaborative efforts across the spinal cord
injury community.
He is a lawyer by trade, practice personally, personal injury lawyer for over 10 years.
He is a person with quadriplegia who sustained a spinal cord injury in 1987 and has been
active as an active advocate in spinal cord injury research for over 30 years.
He is also a valued member of the Ethics and Knowledge Translation Council for the
Men the Gap Project.
So with no further ado, I would like to invite Dr. Fudd to talk about the history of spinal
cord injury treatment and development.
Thank you all again for being here with us.
Dr. Fudd.
Good.
Hi, everyone.
Nice to kind of see you.
So I'm charged to talk about 30 years of research.
I'm going to narrow the research down to the repair of the spinal cord because there's
a field of neuro protection, which is a huge area on its own, but I would be too much.
So when it comes to repair, I think where it all started is when people wondered why
in the periphery, so let's say in your arm or your legs, neurons can regenerate, but
they don't in the spinal cord, right?
Many people heard the stories that fancy hand surgeons, they can put a hand back that
got maybe injured and maybe even cut off by saw or something.
You hear these stories and the neurons can somehow grow back because the hand can be
used at the end again, maybe not perfectly as before, but pretty impressive.
So why is that, right?
That was a big question and I was addressed many, many years ago and in the group from
Albert Aguayo actually in Montreal, where they said, well, let's just try whether it's
something in the nerve or whether it's the nerve cells in the spinal cord that do not
grow.
So they took a piece of nerve from our arm or hand and put it into the spinal cord after
an injury.
And what they found is that actually nerve cells in the spinal cord can grow into this
piece of nerve.
So that's like mind boggling, neurons can actually grow.
And from there, it went pretty quickly that people said, okay, we just have to give neurons
something that they like to grow on.
And that's why a large field started where people were grafting cells that were allowing
growth into the spinal cord.
And there are many, many cell types and famous cells, for example stem cells were used for
that.
So then these cells were given not just to form a bridge that neurons could grow on,
but also to replace cells that were lost by a spinal cord injury or even form neurons
and then offer a relay for injured cells.
But one thing became very clear when people saw that neurons can grow, they looked for
the reasons why they don't in the spinal cord.
And it was thought that, you know, if we find the reason why they don't grow in the spinal
cord, then we can just neutralize that reason and we have a treatment.
That was a brilliant idea.
But the problem was that people found more and more reasons why nerve cells can't grow.
And then many of them, there's a scar around the injury, there are growth inhibitory factors,
and adult mammalians that just seem to not like to grow too much anymore anyway.
And so it became very clear that if we really want to have a powerful treatment, we need
to combine different approaches and neutralize different factors together to get a really
powerful treatment.
And so this field has slowly, slowly evolved.
And in the same time, people started to kind of look a little bit at, well, if there is
no regeneration, why do people recover to a certain degree?
Why can't they?
And the same was in labs, in animal models, there's a certain amount of recovery.
So people started to also learn a little bit about what we call neuroplasticity.
It's the reaction of the nervous system to rearrange after injury.
But everything that's spared can somehow rewire and get kind of reutilized.
And so that became a totally different field where people said, oh, you know, we promote
plasticity, maybe that's how we can help people.
Interestingly enough, these two fields came back together because many factors that help
in the neuroplasticity are also important for the regeneration when we really want to
regrow axons.
So this is how we came here.
And I would say the latest things that really added to the field are, well, thanks to technological
advances.
So for example, one big thing is now we can actually look at different cells and how their
genetic expression changes.
So basically, how do these cells behave differently?
We can really look at the little genes and see how they are basically expressed or read.
And that showed us a lot of things, how different neurons respond to an injury.
And we also learned that there are actually many more cells than just nerve cells.
We always talk about nerve cells, but it comes out that other cells also play a big, big
role in this.
And we have now the chance to look at all these cells and look at this big concerto of different
cells and factors that all play together after an injury.
And I think that's a big step where we move forward.
And then by engineering also made huge leaps, and they're now able to help us to build solutions
for regeneration of the spinal cord to build bridges.
And I think this is what we're going to hear more about from Dr. Madden.
How did I do for time?
I don't even know.
It was brilliant.
Thank you.
Thank you, Dr. Faoud.
Let's go on to Dr. Townsend to bring us a little bit up to date on what's new and maybe
what's old in clinical care in this space.
Yeah, thanks, Judy.
And that is a lot of what I wanted to talk about, what's new and what's old.
So as Dr. Ellis mentioned, I am a rehabilitation medicine clinician.
I'm a physician who looks after people who are living with spinal cord injuries.
And I see patients all the way from acute care right after they've been injured in the
hospital through to rehabilitation at GF Strong, which is our rehab center here in Vancouver,
and then back out into the community when people are back to living in the community
and reintegrating into their lives.
And I think one of the things I was thinking about as I was thinking about this topic was
the fact that in the past 25 years since I've been doing this, there have been some advances
in clinical care, absolutely.
But we haven't had, you know, they've been incremental, they've step by step and we bring
things together and we have, we get excited and there's lots of exciting things happening.
But a lot of what I'm doing today is similar to what I did when I first graduated.
So we're very fortunate here in Canada and particularly, you know, because we have, we
punch way above our weight when it comes to spinal cord injury care and spinal cord injury
research.
And I think one of the things that we do very well and that has changed since I first started
is how quickly we see patients getting their surgery and getting mobilized.
So when I first started training, people would be in bed for weeks on end until they could
start to mobilize and now surgery happens very quickly.
If they need surgery and if surgery isn't going to be done, then we get patients mobilized
very quickly and we get them active and starting in their rehabilitation treatment.
We've also done a better job of integrating our systems.
So our surgeons talk to our rehabilitation specialists and talk to our teams and we've
got a better continuum and integration of care and those transitions I think are smoother
and make a difference.
We've been fortunate in Canada to have been able to establish the Rick Hansen registry,
particularly for traumatic people living with traumatic spinal cord injuries.
But that's a way for us to document who's living with spinal cord injury.
What does that look like?
We follow up with patients over time and it's going to be an opportunity for us down the
road if there are interventions that can be done to identify people who may be able to
benefit from those interventions.
But I wanted to talk to you a little bit about some of the other clinical advances that have
happened.
So, as Judy mentioned, one of my areas of interest is ventilator dependency.
So when people have spinal cord injuries, there's an interruption in the signal from
the brain out to the body and that interruption happens in the spinal cord.
And depending on where that interruption happens, how high in the spinal cord it happens, they
may not be able to breathe independently or on their own.
So if patients have very high injuries at C3, C4, C5 up in the neck, which is what we
call those, they may not have an intact nerve, the phrenic nerve that goes to their diaphragm.
And one of the advances we've made is that when I first started, we had few options for
people who were on ventilators and needed assistance breathing.
We now have diaphragmatic pacemakers.
And so when I first started, you could do a phrenic nerve pacemaker, but you had to crack
open a chest and do a thoracotomy and it was very risky and there were lots of complications.
But Dr. Ray Anders out of Cleveland Clinic has developed a diaphragmatic pacemaker that
can be inserted endoscopically.
And so it's very minor surgery.
It's just a slight procedure.
The patients can go home at the end of the day and then we can start stimulating their
diaphragm directly and integrating that and people can start to breathe.
They're not breathing on their own.
It's a pacemaker that is helping them breathe, but they can get off the ventilator.
So that's a huge advance just in my area where I take care of patients.
And I think it shows what happens when we bring together the biomedical engineers.
My daughter is a biomedical engineering student, so I've got to give a plug to our biomedical
engineers.
When we bring together our surgeons, when we bring together our rehabilitation doctors,
our respiratory therapists, our physiotherapists, our occupational therapists, all of our team
members are nursing and social worker.
And I think that's what I really wanted to emphasize is that no matter what happens in
terms of advances in clinical care, we're going to need rehabilitation.
It's not going to be simply give a pill or do a device.
We're going to need to be able to have rehabilitation specialists, team members working together
and working with patients to individualize and personalize how that treatment is delivered.
So at the end of the day, we're going to have lots of exciting news about advances and
potential treatments.
But we need to make sure that it's a person who's receiving those treatments.
Their priorities may not be the same as our priorities.
We have to individualize that.
And we have to make sure that we've got a team in place ready for them.
There you go, Judy.
Five minutes.
Also brilliant.
Thank you so much.
I see questions already coming in the chat.
So please do bring them on.
I'm already monitoring.
It's fantastic.
And I'm going to invite Dr. Madden now to speak about some innovations in spinal cord
injury repair.
And I know that he also has a special treat for us.
We normally do not allow PowerPoint presentations in these community conversations that we tried
to keep them conversational.
But he has a wonderful, very short video to share with us that I think everybody will
really benefit from.
So over to you, John.
Thank you, Judy.
And great, great to be talking to you all and to tell you about a new project that we've
just launched.
We're now in the first just over six months of a six year, $24 million international project.
We have 28 professors from around the world from 11 universities.
About half of the investigators are in Canada, or actually about two thirds are in Canada,
also in Germany, Australia, Sweden, US.
And our goal is to do what Karim was describing, which is to demonstrate regeneration in the
spinal cord.
So can we get those connections to regrow?
And as Karim outlined, there are a lot of pieces that have to be addressed.
And so what we're hoping by the end of six years, we can show that this should be possible.
And then from there, build on that towards showing that it can be possible in a person.
And some of the pieces we've talked about, we need to create the conditions in which a
neuron wants to regrow.
So that means putting in different drugs locally to make that happen, create the right environment.
We need to also guide the neurons, and I'll show you how we're going to do that.
That involves some engineering.
We need to get rid of some of the scarring that blocks the growth and the site of injury.
We need to get into the area without doing more damage than we came to repair.
This is really important.
And we need to understand and make sure that our solution is something that people actually
want and that is reasonable to actually try on people before we know for sure it's going
to work on.
So there are a lot of questions that have to be answered.
And then after that, we also, and along with that, we need to figure out the rehabilitation.
So let me show you a brief video of our approach if everything works out here.
And so what you're going to see, and I'll just go into presentation mode, hopefully.
So what you're seeing here is a back view, an artist's rendition of all the signals going
down.
And now these white bulbous lines are representations of axons, which are way larger than they truly
are.
They're much smaller than a hair.
And we've just created an injury.
And so these injuries can be several centimeters across due to motor vehicle accidents, sports
accidents, falling out flatters, gunshot wounds, lots of different potential causes.
Normally our spinal cord or our spine protects us, but sometimes it fails.
And then we create an injury similar to what's shown here.
And there's scarring surrounding it.
And so the axons, even if they try to regrow, they're blocked by scarring and the environment,
even if they penetrate in, they have nothing to grow on.
So what we're doing is injecting via a needle these tiny rods.
Each rod in length is less than the diameter of a hair.
And we align them using a magnetic field.
And then by reducing the scarring, we then hope to get these connections to start regrowing
in a directed fashion across the region and forming connections at the other side.
So this is our hope.
We're still, there's still a lot of research that has to be done to put all this together.
And at the end of this, we hope to show that this is possible.
As I said, we have a team, a large international team.
We also have partners, including some, so many of our team are actually on the call today.
And we also have some of our partners, Praxis Spinal Cord Institute, based in Vancouver,
but an international institute, Rick Hansen Foundation, and Spinal Cord Injury BC are
our main partners.
Together, we are then putting to, we've got materials experts led by Laura Delaporte,
who's in Germany.
What she has shown is that she can create these tiny little rods that are magnetically aligned
and that the nerves can grow along them, the axons can grow along them.
Now what we're doing is trying a whole range of different approaches to see which ones work best.
How do we then diminish scarring?
How do we then create the right environments?
How do we deliver drugs?
And a big part of the project is another engineering part, which is how do we deliver the materials
into the Spinal Cord without doing damage?
So for that, we're using image-guided robotic surgery.
And so we have members of the team who are experts with expertise in all these different
areas coming together to try and solve or make an advance in an area that has been proven
to be extremely challenging.
So thank you.
Another brilliant presentation.
Barry Monroe, the bar is set very high for you, but we're ready and we're excited to hear from you.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you for having us on and letting me have the opportunity to speak to everybody today.
As Judy said earlier, I'm a Spinal Cord injured person.
I've had my injury 35 years ago.
So I've been, frankly, a front seat witness to watching the evolution of research.
And from the dark days, when we weren't allowed to talk about any type of restorative research,
the point of great presentation, just like Dr. Madden just gave us there.
We are in an interesting time.
And yet we are not quite there yet when it comes to really the empowerment of the people
with lived experience and the role that we should play in research.
In fact, we're late to the game when it comes to Spinal Cord injury research.
Many other indications and conditions like Parkinson's, ALS, Alzheimer's, Muscular Sclerosis,
they have patient advocates.
I use that word patient, excuse me, but that's sort of the institutional name.
But they have people with lived experience that are actually involved from start to finish
and research in terms of their influence.
You cannot replace the expertise that somebody has with a Spinal Cord injury
in knowing about Spinal Cord injury.
And unfortunately, some of that information has been lost or never translated into the lab
and into the great people that are doing fantastic work and research,
where this would take it to the next level.
And really what we're doing right now with this Canadian Spinal Research Organization
and really working with the North American SCI Consortium,
which, by the way, was born, in theory, out of the Praxis Conference in 2016,
which is great and kind of a nice plug for Made in Canada story,
where we've come together and we've decided to create a resource
that would empower people with Spinal Cord injuries
to be more active advocates in research.
Frankly, it wasn't hard to start putting together the concept
because many other conditions, like I said before, have already done that.
In fact, I think the early leaders were breast cancer survivors
where they were raising all this money for research,
but they really had no input on research.
And I want to go back to what Andrea said earlier,
that we need to listen to the priorities of the people with spinal cord injuries
as we move forward with profession in terms of treatment and clinicians
and how we go forward.
Having us at the table at the beginning can increase the value of the research,
can make it more effective, it can be easily translated better,
and frankly, it saves money.
The proof is in the pudding that in certain conditions
where they've involved the people with lived experience in the research,
they've had a much better success rate and recruitment for clinical trials
and they didn't record time and did it more efficiently.
Why? Because they asked the people that know.
So what we're pushing and what we're really trying to facilitate
is the seat at the table.
That we, with people with spinal cord injuries,
have a meaningful role in the research enterprise.
And it's not that anybody ever was trying to eliminate that.
That just was a traditional way it was.
But that is going to change.
I promise you it's going to change.
And it'll be a change that'll be good for the better.
And frankly, I'm excited about what transforms really in the next six months.
So stay tuned.
There will be a spinal cord injury research advocacy course
ready for people to enroll in both researchers
and people with spinal cord injuries
to really increase their knowledge in late terms
about how do you understand and be actively involved in spinal cord research.
And that's coming soon in the fall of 2022.
So we're looking forward to that.
And thank you for the opportunity to speak about this today.
Thank you so very much.
I am we're not done with you yet because my my first question for the panel
and I have a few here that I've been recording.
Perhaps you've heard me clicking away on my keyboard is for the panelists.
And I'm I'm seeing lots of questions come in.
So I suspect I won't get through my own list.
But I think my first question for you, Barry, is is for you.
And it also comes from a meeting that I had earlier today
with the Canadian Brain Research Strategy.
And we were talking about patient and affected person engagement.
People with lived experience and I think we are seeing breakthroughs
in engaging people with lived experience in the design
and interpretation of results and dissemination of results
to the larger community when it comes to human studies.
But some of our researchers were questioning what the role
and what the expertise is of a person with lived experience
in a basic science experiment.
Like, can you really understand anything at the table?
And can you really meaningfully contribute?
I was wondering if you could speak to that for us?
Well, that that is an excellent question because, in fact,
in the work that we're doing right now in building this course is that
the input we're getting from the research side is not from clinicians
so much as from basic researchers.
And they've come to the table specifically to say it is very important,
a so they can understand it when it comes to the original design
of what it is they're trying to prove is that how would this help
the person with spinal cord injury period?
And I'm sorry, as a funder, if you can't answer that question,
get out of my office.
I don't have time for it.
Thirty five years in a wheelchair.
I don't have time for it.
Too many of my friends are gone because of the secondary complications.
So that has to be a priori number one, at least indirectly or directly down the road.
Number two, it's a form of really empowerment, too.
And it helps somebody that's in a toiling a lab one day,
wondering why they're doing all this when they meet somebody and they meet
some great people that are with lived experience that can give them that advice
and talk to them.
It really helps kind of energize them and bring more passion to the table.
But you'd be surprised when we're talking about design,
design comes from basic researchers at the very beginning.
They don't get enough credit.
They're the ones that come up with the concepts that see 10 chefs moves down the road.
And so it's by that input from the very beginning of the day
that we have a great influence on that.
I think it's very important at that point.
Super, thank you so much.
I'm going to combine a question from the Q&A, and I am going to go out of order.
And I do promise we will get to all the questions that have come in so far.
So I don't don't worry if your question is in first, but I'm not asking it first.
But there's a question about what is the biggest reason that spinal cords can't
repair themselves like nerves in the hand mentioned by Dr.
Fahoud. And with that question, I would like to layer on another one,
which is how well do animal studies that are successful or even
unsuccessful in demonstrating effectiveness translate to the human condition?
So maybe, Dr. Fahoud, we can start with you and then we'll let the others jump in
for those that two part question.
So that gives me 15 more minutes, right?
So so why do they not grow?
Well, it starts really with cleaning up at the injury side.
And the peripheral nerve, basically, there is a highway outlined for neurons
to grow on and it remains intact in the spinal cord.
We basically end up with a cavitation, a hole, basically.
And this is then sealed off with a kind of a brick wall from a certain
cell type called astrocytes and fibroblasts.
And so we basically have a wall and a hole and neurons can't grow
not through the wall and not through the hole.
We need to kind of overcome that.
The next reason is that even if they would make it in the spinal cord,
there are different cells than in the peripheral nerve that do this
milination, that means they wrap around accents and insulate them.
And the cells in the spinal cord, interesting enough,
they have molecules on top of them that are growth inhibitory.
So when an neuron would come and grow along and hits one of those,
it is like a punch in the face.
They withdraw and they give up growing.
So there are actually molecules in the spinal cord that stop growth actively.
And the last thing I want to mention is that in the spinal cord,
it looks like that the program for cells to grow has kind of be turned off
or tuned down, which doesn't happen in the peripheral nervous system.
So these are all factors that we have to consider when we try to build
a reparative system or platform like we tried to do.
OK, thank you.
And perhaps the second part of the question is how well do animal studies translate?
Yeah, that is a huge topic.
It's massive.
And this is a little bit my personal spin on it, I think.
And I believe, let's say, I believe that animal models actually translate very well.
The problem is that even in the animal model,
we do not have a robust treatment yet.
We don't, right?
And so that's that's number one.
So how can I translate something that is not very successful in the animal model?
Well, we don't know.
The issue is also that even from lab to lab, we have a hard time to replicate
studies that's proven.
It's it has been done.
People try to replicate very prominent studies and they weren't doing so well.
So the system is really complicated.
And I think we really not ready to say, oh, you know,
it just doesn't translate because it's done in a rat or in mouse.
It doesn't translate humans.
I'm actually a strong believer it will.
I'm very certain about that.
It will very well, but we haven't had something so robust in the animal model
that we can compare it between labs and then do successful translation.
So that's why I think we are struggling and not because it's tested in animals.
All right. Thank you.
Yes, please just make a brief comment is also that, you know, as as an engineer
on the on this, I'm not an expert on the animal side, but, you know,
I think all my colleagues would rather not have to use animals at all.
The challenge is that this is such an extremely complex system
that it's so far impossible to create a
an outside the animal or in vitro version of it.
But that is part of our project.
So we start actually in the lab in using an artificial
spinal cord to pre-screen our solutions and then move on to animals.
The other thing that that, you know,
Wolf Tetzlaff, who's one of the leaders of the project,
has told me many times is that you can look in the literature
and see many people who have claimed to solve this problem.
But often they are simply repairing two ends of the cord
that are extremely close to each other to start with.
And that's not the problem that we have here, typically.
It's we're talking about bridging a gap that may be centimeters across.
And that's a huge challenge.
So thank you.
Thank you, Andrea.
And I was just going to add that the additional part
that becomes hard when we're using animal models is the is the rehabilitation.
You can do a certain amount of basic rehab, but it's real.
It's not the same type of rehab that you may be able to do in in in humans.
So it's it's just an extra layer that we're going to need to add in there
that we may not be able to do to a full extent in an animal model.
OK. Oh, Karim, certainly.
Don't you unmute?
I just would like to add to this. I totally agree, right?
We realize that if you don't have this component of of rehabilitation
training in there that we can do in in humans,
we will most likely not translate the effect of any growth promoting treatment.
So it is part of the part of the combined package.
And and we really adding this and I'm promoting this also big time
that it is part of any treatment has to be, you know,
at least as close as possible, what we do in humans.
OK. Nice. Thank you.
I want to continue on this thread a little bit, but before I do that,
I want to give a shout out to Anita Kaiser,
who is a member of our ethics and KT Council who writes in the chat.
People with lived experience can help basic scientists
see the big picture, streamline their objective and give greater meaning
and purpose to the work they do. I couldn't agree with you more.
Ashley Lawson on my team and Canadian Brain Research Strategy.
If you could please take note of that.
I think that's something we want to feedback to the national strategy
that we're developing for brain research today.
Going back to the sort of some scientific questions,
we have a question from Susanna Brooke,
who's a member of the NEST lab under the direction of Dr.
Julie Robillard as part of NeuroEthics Canada, who queries whether
how acute and chronic injuries influence
these questions of regeneration.
How do we think about individuals in different timelines
on the recovery trajectory in terms of patient recruitment and participation?
And the floor is open to any of you to respond.
OK, I guess I start.
First of all, it's an excellent question.
Second of all, I'm not very proud how the field has handled this
for the longest time, because for the longest time,
people did research in acute models because it's.
It's quicker.
And I think this is a wonderful example where, you know,
the feedback from the community, from people living with spider injury
came in and said, look, the majority of us live with this chronic injury.
How does that affect us?
And as researchers, we really it was let's say not eye opening,
but it was it was a little bit embarrassing for me to say,
yeah, we need to look at this better.
Is the system different? Absolutely.
In the acute system, the nervous system is still more adaptive than in the chronic.
But we also realize now that maybe you can recreate this acute system.
We start to understand it also with a new technology available to us.
We start to understand what the difference is between acute and chronic.
And by the way, if you ask anyone,
nobody will probably agree on what the term acute and chronic means in the first place.
So we we need to define those very clearly on what are we basing this
acute and chronic and and we can start to learn
the different time courses on the transition.
And even now we can learn how does this compare between animals and humans?
And we learn so much more about how to then really apply these treatments
and people with different age, with different chronicity of the injury and so on.
So it's undexplored, that's for sure.
But yes, there are big differences and we are getting there.
You know, I want to jump in.
Yeah, that is a good question.
It's funny, I can guarantee that of the 68 people on this call right now
and of those who have a spinal cord injury, none of them are acute.
OK, what is their priority?
OK, that's the point.
And that's why we ask these questions.
And I'll even go a little cynical and say sometimes people
want to do the acute like Kareem had.
Perfectly laid out the differences and why
what an acute injury can potentially do with the potential of recovery.
It's it's considered a more of a low hanging fruit
and a potential better numbers and a win.
And and that and there's also another argument to that
if you can find something restorative and acute,
there might be a good chance that that same treatment would work
in someone with chronic as well.
So the problem is that we have is how do you know
after five days, five weeks, five months,
if their recovery is a result of the treatment that was given
or it was just a natural recovery that happens in many people's spinal cord
injuries, and that's where we have a problem.
And on top of that, recruitment for acute is very difficult,
especially if the window is short and that you only have,
you know, forty seventy two hours just getting informed consent on a new therapy
is is highly questionable on whether it's valid or not.
So there's a lot of challenges here,
but I know everybody's working hard to get to that point.
I can just say this is a huge consideration in our project.
Just, you know, we I think we pretty much decided that
there's no way that we can give a
a totally new treatment to somebody within twenty four or forty eight
hours of injury, or it's very unlikely.
And so we're probably looking initially at least sort of thirty days or so before.
But again, that's a really open question.
And then how does this how does what we learn translate to those who have had
a longer term injury and and does it?
So these are these are really important questions.
And indeed, and I'll just jump in and say
under funding from the Stem Son Network many years ago,
my team and I showed some really profound effects
from the perspectives of people with acute and chronic injuries
and also different levels of injury in terms of what would constitute
an appropriate time to seek participation in a clinical trial.
And and we were, in fact, quite wrong in predicting
that those with cervical injuries would be the most anxious to participate.
And in fact, we found that they were the most risk averse,
really cautious of losing any sort of residual function whatsoever.
And those who who had who were further out
and had more residual function were more likely to be interested
in participating in a clinical trial that involves stem cells anyway.
And so much work to be done.
There's a question that
if from Anita on sex differences in recovery based on animal models.
And in fact, the question of sex differences and inclusion criteria
around marginalized populations and so forth is one that I also had.
And I think it's a nice a segue from what we've just been talking about.
Maybe, Andrea, can you speak to gender differences
and sex differences in spinal cord injury?
Recovery patterns that might pertain to
differences.
And then we can also think about what research looks like in terms of inclusivity.
So I can I can mention a couple of things.
One is we have our traditional what we think of as our stereotypical
spinal cord injured individual.
And traditionally, that was a young male, 18 to 35 high risk behavior.
But what we see in that and that ratio was generally sort of four to one
men to women were injured.
But what we now see is that we actually have a bimodal distribution.
So we've got one group of younger patients who do still tend to be more men than women.
And then we have an older population group where it's not as high an impact.
It's not as what we call a high impact injury.
It may simply be a fall and because it's generative changes in the spine,
they get a traumatic spinal cord injury.
And that's much more of a 50 50 picture in terms of gender.
So just in terms of who gets spinal cord injuries, we've got sort of two populations.
And in terms of recovery and natural history, I don't think there's much of a difference,
not that I'm aware of.
And then the other thing is we've been talking a lot about traumatic spinal cord injury.
So traumatic spinal cord injury is is is due to trauma.
So it's what we typically think of for spinal cord injury, a car accident,
a sporting accident, violence, falls.
But often, you know, 50 percent of the spinal cord injuries we see are non-traumatic.
So they may be due to a stroke or a vascular event or an infection or a bleed.
So there's there's lots of other reasons to have spinal cord injuries.
And again, those often tend to be more or cancer or tumor.
Those tend to be more 50 50 with men and women impacted.
All right, thank you.
Other comments on enrollment criteria and inclusivity, sex differences in the space?
No. OK, then let's carry on in this thread.
There seems to be some interest in the chat around some clinical trials.
I believe that nerve gen, a company called nerve gen is conducting.
Maybe, Dr. Madden, you could speak a little bit to that trial
and why it's of interest to mend the gap.
I'm just going to note that none of us, to my knowledge,
have a conflict of interest with any devices or pharmacologics
that are being tested in the space.
And if you do and wish to declare it, we would appreciate it.
Dr. Madden, over to you.
So I'll pass it over to Kareem shortly, because he has a better knowledge of this.
But I guess there are a number of different there are a number of companies
and a number of labs that are looking at alternative methods
to promote regeneration in the spinal cord.
I would say that none are quite as comprehensive,
but there are lots of promising approaches.
One of them, which is not what nerve gen are looking at,
but is to create a sort of a scaffold
that gets inserted into the injury site
and contains little tubes along which axons can grow.
And so there are clinical trials going on with that at the moment.
We await to see how successful they've been.
One of the concerns that we have with that is that it is more invasive.
So it's not a needle-bending.
So it's not a needle-driven approach.
And there are a lot of drug treatments and other treatments
that people are looking at.
And one of the interesting approaches is one that nerve gen has produced.
And I'll let Kareem maybe speak to that.
And I'll just say that we are interested in what they're doing
and look forward to seeing how it turns out.
So I'll turn it over to Kareem.
I think I can take it a step further, John.
We're not just interested.
We're actually working with them.
And obviously, I have a disclosure agreement
and I really don't want to go into too much detail here.
But we are working with them and it's a very good collaboration.
And we just basically started the experiment.
And really what it's based on, it's again,
one of these factors I mentioned that inhibit neurons from growing.
And nerve gen has a target that we could basically try to neutralize
and promote then growth of nerve cells.
So that is a collaboration with them.
They're trying, obviously, also different injuries
and diseases of the nervous system.
But for spinal injury, we have a very good collaboration going right now.
Thank you. Any other comments on that?
I think Barry put the link to the trial in the chat.
Is that right?
Yeah, there's a couple of search engines out there now,
but we really promote the SEI trials dot org.
And it really helps people identify if they're interested
in any kind of clinical trials anywhere in the world.
It's all in lay terms and they can set up their own profile.
And many companies now that are in the recruitment stage
of any type of clinical trial are using this one as well as a few others.
So they're they're they're looking for that connection between
people recruiting and people wanting to be involved in trials.
So please try it out and go through it and set up a profile.
You might find it interesting and helpful.
Yeah, Barry, can you comment?
Is the US based clinical trials dot gov
also a good resource of information for people seeking clinical trials?
Yeah, it actually SEI trials dot org
does feed off of clinical trials dot gov.
So it's a it's been a court of government approved trial.
I understand right now that the government
the US clinical trials dot gov is now going to a beta change.
They want to change it. It's a little archaic.
It's not the easiest site to go through.
That's why I suggested SEI trials dot org, but stay tuned.
I think there is some changes coming to that site.
That's our change in as well.
All right, thank you.
If somebody could just type clinical trials dot gov into the chat
for those who wished to have it decoded, I'd appreciate that.
Thank you.
So I'm going to go all the way to the top of my chat screen,
tracking a lot of things with great pleasure here.
I'm a question that came into me directly.
And so I will share the name of the individual
who recently listened to a Ted daily talk from last week.
And it was about control of digital devices.
And this device appears as a brain computer interface
that's designed to assist people with ALS to communicate their thoughts
and then their desires and wishes.
I've done a lot of work in this space as well.
It is both powerful technology and technology
that is still evolving.
Our participant asks whether there's a potential for such a BCI interface,
a brain computer interface to assist individuals with spinal cord injury.
What has been done in that area?
And is there something we should be looking forward to
coming out of the laboratories who are working in the BCI space?
The answer is, yeah.
It's actually a lot of activity in that area right now.
And there's a few competing companies.
NeuroLink, you've heard of a certain gentleman named Elon Musk
is the principal of BlackRock and others.
There's work in this area because it's also not just spinal cord injury.
It really deals with so many different conditions that it could help potentially.
Thanks, Terry.
Other comments on the BCIs?
And then I will actually have a comment.
I'll just mention briefly that
in a way, this is an alternative approach to what Men the Gap is looking at.
So in the can you hear me OK?
And in the ultimate
in the ultimate
version of that, you would imagine reading signals above the injury
and then passing them back down below the injury
and and creating a sort of a digital communication
between the upper and lower areas.
Now, that's still a ways away of, you know, at the moment,
and Kareem can correct me if I'm wrong, but we're talking about
maybe 16 electrodes being read or, you know, or maybe,
you know, one hundred and twenty eight or relatively small numbers of electrodes.
But there's the other area that
where Men the Gap is is sort of on a parallel track is looking at
ways of using electrical stimulation in helping with rehabilitation.
So it turns out you've probably seen in the news with some of the
the Broncos hockey players who have been received spinal cord injury
using electrical stimulation and so on.
So that's an area where we will be needing to go
in order to help with with with recovery.
And I'll turn it over to Kareem in case he has any additional comments.
Yeah, I mean, the field is huge.
Let's let's face it.
And there are various levels that you could apply it.
But I'm I'm very impressed for, you know, already for a couple years.
That's been shown that the very low number of electrodes put into the the cortex
artificial robotic arms could be controlled and fairly precise, actually.
So that is definitely something to look at.
There are many challenges, obviously, with that.
If you put something into the brain of a person, that is a critical thing.
And biomaterials, for example, they don't last forever.
I don't know, John, you can comment on that again.
But I know when I was visiting Pittsburgh, who was very advanced in this research,
they said, well, the insulation is going to fall apart after 15 years.
So, you know, you cannot put this in into a person of 25 years.
You have to exchange everything in the cortex.
You might do more damage.
You might get inflammation.
It is it is a complex topic around, you know, how compatible are we?
And so the lesson base, if you would be probably the better that is.
But it has a lot of future.
And even if it's just a mere modulation, right, you don't have to feed
into every muscle and control it, you could feed it back into the spinal cord
and just increase the excitability of circuitry at the point when it's needed.
And that could just give the extra boost, right?
It doesn't have to be the complete control of the body.
It could just be a little bit of a booster to help
whatever is remaining in the spinal to actually execute the task.
So it's a very excited field.
It's it's promising for sure.
So just to follow up briefly on some of the materials challenges.
So you can imagine if you have some of the original electrodes
are made of metal, not surprisingly.
And you can imagine if you have something as stiff as a metal
in the really soft material that makes up the brain
and and the central nervous system, the spinal cord.
There are stresses that then lead to
sort of an encapsulation by the body of those electrodes.
And so gradually you lose the electrical connection.
There can also be immune responses and so on.
So this is a problem that people are working on really
actively to try and create the right materials to interface with the electrodes.
And that includes using, in some cases,
plastics or polymers that are much softer
and also are able to exchange ions and not just electrons
and then create an interface that's much more like a natural interface.
You know, our electronics operate at, you know, three volts, five volts,
15 volts, whereas the the electrical potentials
across our cells are more like tens or, you know, 70 millivolts or so.
So there's a big difference in the electrical properties
of our electronic devices and and and people are learning how to overcome
these challenges and there's been a lot of success lately.
So it is a very promising area.
And by the way, we're looking to hire somebody,
a Canada Excellence Research Chair in Neuroprosthetics
in exactly this area to complement our other work.
So if you know of people, June 15th is when we need the application.
All right. Thank you for that commercial.
So I'm going to make another commercial.
As somebody who's particularly interested in the ethics of innovations
for neuroscience, you know, I just want to point out
to our audience that when as researchers, we have funded grants
from the government, we have we are required to have ethics
oversight from our institutions and even from the bodies that fund us
that have their own ethics offices and regimes.
Organizations or companies like Neuralink that are that are truly private
have no ethics oversight per se or are not required to have ethics oversight per se.
And so we as an ethics group are very interested in keeping an eye
on what organizations like Neuralink or Stentroad are doing,
working with these companies to help ensure the highest standards
of research ethics conduct is really being undertaken.
We do know that Neuralink recently posted
that in competition with you potentially, John, for a clinical trials coordinator,
which would suggest to anyone that they're trying to embark on clinical trials.
And, you know, it's of great interest to us
how they're really undertaking the highest standards of ethics in what they're doing.
I'm sure their intentions are good.
But boots on the ground are pretty important.
And with that, I'd like to ask Andrea Townsend.
If you you have a patient who says, Dr. Townsend,
I want to enroll in this clinical trial that's going to put 16 or eight
or four electrodes in my brain, what are the factors?
What do you advise and what are the factors that your patients should be
thinking about in before jumping before jumping too fast on that wagon?
Yeah, I am this is a dilemma for me.
This one is it's truly a dilemma for me.
I I have had so.
I don't have a lot of experience with brain implants, spinal cord stimulators.
We've been using those.
I have experience with those because we've been using those for pain for a long time.
So spinal cord stimulators, we've been using those for pain.
Those are devices that have been used for that.
Epidural stimulators and now are being sort of repurposed and advanced
and used for a different reason for neuromodulation
and to see if we can get some recovery and regenerate happening.
But we do see complications with them, right?
We do see complications, leads, leads break, leads a road.
Batteries need replacing.
You know, there's things that happen with when we have devices that are implanted
and there's many different devices that we work with on a regular basis.
So I I always talk to patients about about how to investigate
whether what they're doing is a true study.
So I talk to them about some of the resources.
So some of the resources like the spot that I send them to clinicaltrials.gov.
I send them to SCI trials dot org.
I ask them to to talk to us as clinicians
if they are thinking about enrolling or engaging in a study.
Is it really a study?
Are they having to pay money or are or is it a study?
Like what what are the incentives?
What are the disincentives?
What is the follow up involved?
Do they have to travel somewhere?
Do they have to stay somewhere for rehab after they have something implanted?
Because these are all very practical factors, let alone the actual technology itself.
And and what's involved.
And but yeah, it's it's interesting because it's not it's a difficult
it these are difficult questions to answer.
Is there a way of evaluating?
Oh, gosh, I don't even know how to say this in a correct way.
The authenticity of a clinical trial.
Um, like who it's being run by, who the company is, what other work they've done and so forth.
Um, are these in are these on the websites?
Like are they registered as a clinical trial, for example?
Well, that's a good question.
I'd like to just start that as someone says a spinal cord and people are asking me all the time.
I give out the following criteria.
First of all, when you're talking about the science itself, has it been peer reviewed?
That's number one, because if it's if it's a treatment of some sort that has not been published
by and looked at by its peers, that is a huge warning sign.
In fact, and stay away from medical tourism.
And frankly, I got to tell you that right now.
Why? And by the way, this goes back from the beginning of time.
For some reason, when we have our injuries, we can't accept that there's certain things
just haven't been created or found yet or discovered.
So we have this idea that in some backwards lab, either behind the old Soviet Union
or in Mexico somewhere or Peru, and we bring in shark fin and everything else.
That somehow some way that's the answer because they read about it somewhere.
Or here's the worst part, if you're paying for it, not a good thing.
Those are warning signs that it's not necessarily an approved clinical trial
that could have actual efficacy that could help somebody.
It's kind of known as what we call medical tourism.
All right, thank you.
Those tips are really important.
That your questions are now getting ahead of me, which is very exciting,
but very daunting for me.
So I'm going to move on to another question that came in early in this conversation
about nutritional supplements.
Can nutritional supplements help with neuro scarring tied over,
tied people over between treatments?
Do you have, again, we're not offering clinical advice here in this conversation,
but perhaps insights and experience that would be valuable
in addressing this very interesting question.
Somebody wish to take on supplements.
I can't really answer that, I'm afraid, but I do know we have some experts
who, including Ward Planet, who's on the call here, I think, and Wolf Tetz left.
So there is a lot of work trying to relate injury to diet and so on.
I'm just not an expert in that area.
OK, I can maybe comment a little bit on it.
Because inflammation is a big part of a spying or an injury.
Acutely, but also in the recovery process.
Nutrition can influence inflammation quite a bit.
And this now also comes then with a gut microbiome,
which also is changing after spying or injury.
And and there have been some relatively dramatic effects on on recovery
and not just we're not just talking motor recovery.
We're talking, for example, also mental health.
So. Yes, I think there are factors in nutrition that we can influence,
very simple influence them.
I think there's a big trend in research now to say,
let's do things that we can actually relatively easily do and address
and have small gains with them.
And then maybe, you know, we can add them all together to a platform
like we do now with Men with the Gap.
The problem is, how do you do research
when you have so many factors and you throw them together?
You need to control for them.
You need to compare things.
And this is what makes it very hard.
But I think, yes, they have a big future.
And there are many researchers now looking at that.
And, you know, maybe they just add a little bit here or there.
But there's something that that we can and we will see in the future much more.
All right. Thank you.
All right, I'm going to go on to a pair of questions now
that I'm going to take the liberty of assembling.
And there's a question about
so comorbidities, loss of bone, arthritis,
and maybe, you know, multi-level injuries.
How do these combine or conspire to affect
good outcomes in the research and in eventually quality of life?
And what does success really look like?
I'll say by itself or in the face of multi-level injury or comorbidities?
Should I tackle comorbidities? I'll tackle comorbidities.
I think you're the best for that.
Pardon me.
You're probably the most suited to answer that one.
So, I mean, one of the things we know
and one of the things that Barry alluded to as well
is all the secondary complications we get from spinal cord injury.
So that ranges from increased risk of metabolic syndrome
and metabolic syndrome is, you know, early onset diabetes,
cardiovascular health, hyperlipidemia or high cholesterol.
So these are all these are all things that we see in spinal cord injury.
Osteoporosis is something that we see significantly below the level of the injury,
particularly in people who have motor complete injury.
So people who don't have motor movement below the level of their injury.
And we see that osteoporosis very quickly
and very and it's very substantial.
So it happens within, you know, within days,
people start to have bone turnover and then within months,
they've had significant bone density loss.
So there is always that risk of people having low bone density
and an increased risk of breaking a bone below the level of the injury.
But and this is a big but, but we still stand people up many years
after their injury in a standing frame or in and we don't they don't just crumble.
People don't just crumble, but we have to be careful
if we're suddenly going to apply a force to those bones.
So the difference between standing somebody up passively
where they're just standing up and being supported versus somebody standing up
because their muscles suddenly pulling on a bone is something
we're going to have to think about.
And so for people living with spinal cord injury,
it's maintaining their nutrition as much as they can.
And, you know, bone density, obviously, it depends
on much more than what we were just talking about supplements.
So making sure you get your vitamin D and all those good calcium and all those good things.
But it's also maintaining your range of motion as much as you can
so that you don't have contractures.
You haven't lost range of motion and trying to maintain
to maintain those pieces as much as possible.
But it is something we're going to need to think about
and people who have who have had been living with chronic spinal cord injury.
Right. Anyone else?
Weighing in on this.
OK, I'm going to again call out Anita Kaiser, who, you know,
reinforces to all of us that exercise, good health,
good health behaviors are essential to well being and indeed for benefiting
for from anything new that comes down the pipeline.
Right. If we approach something from a position of strength, behavioral and physical strength,
we're most likely to benefit.
I'm going to do another land assembly here for those of you in Vancouver.
You know what I'm talking about?
We're like assembling land all over our city.
And this has to do with including inclusivity and recruitment.
And it's a question that's posed both by Adam Fraser,
who's the executive director of Men the Gap and another audience participant,
which really speaks to what are the what are what are the challenges
to recruiting people from all backgrounds to a project like Men the Gap
to other kinds of spinal cord injury research, what methods work, what methods don't work
and what should we attend to when it comes to participant enrollment and recruitment?
Kareem, and then I'm going to also ask Barry to weigh in.
I just want to start because when we start from a basic research aspect,
when it comes to translation, the clinical trial, we have to be careful
what we're looking at from basic research, what we're taking to the clinic,
because some treatments are effective in a certain lesion model
and they would not do anything in another.
And I experienced this.
We did research in a certain model.
It was taken to the clinic and then, you know, everyone was recruited
and then it didn't work out and there are examples of that.
So I think the first step when we talk about recruitment,
which many clinicians might not even look at in detail, but what model did this work?
And if it worked in that model, do we need them to consider this
for the recruitment of the trial or the first set of trials at least
to get a promising finding?
Because that's it's a big consideration that gets neglected very frequently.
I want to speak to Kareem.
You touched on something that's basically talking about the different models.
But there's there's currently a big I'm not saying a debate,
but there's a big discussion on how we can really get out of the typical
most model that works great, but doesn't work in the human.
How do we bridge that gap?
That's number one, and that's a big discussion.
But one thing is interesting that we must remember, and this is sorry.
This is part of a course I keep we're building right now.
So it's easy off the top of my head.
But one of the biggest differences between spinal cord injury
and a lot of a lot of other even neurological conditions
that were very heterogeneous, that you could have 100
spinal cord injuries in a room and have 100 different implications
of how that injury needs to be treated or how it respond to something.
Not like, say, an MS study where, you know, you're dealing with certain
more homogeneous type things.
So and when I say heterogeneous, we're all different, much different
than most other conditions when it compares to each other.
So that's a task for scientists and clinicians is how do we
try to get together something that might help a group of people
as opposed to a one off?
And I'll just want to say that
for the Men the Gap project, we are at least six years away from
from having a, you know, starting a clinical trial.
So and and and deciding on these questions, we're already trying to think
about how we would do that if we are successful.
But it and it is a huge challenge.
But really, this project is a moonshot.
So it's really a huge, very highly ambitious, big project.
We think we know what pieces we need to put together,
but we're not ready yet to take it to a human.
When it comes to this idea of, of, you know, mouse or rat models.
There, one of the issues, as I understand it, is just the scale
is so small compared to the human.
And so we need to go up the scale before we get to trials in humans.
And so so that's another another challenge.
When we come to the diversity,
you know, there is a often a common.
Issue, which is the the wound and and and treating the wound site
and the the sort of breaking of the connection and the restoring of the connection.
And that's really what what this project, the Men the Gap project is aimed at,
which then hopefully can help with the myriad of other complications
that come along with spinal cord injury.
And just to give some numbers, I think, you know,
some people on the call know these numbers better.
But individuals with SCI, it's common for the lifetime
cost to be three to six million dollars.
So beyond the huge impact on the quality of life,
there's also a huge cost associated with it.
And that total cost can be similar to the cost of all cancers.
So not, you know, maybe about a third the cost of all cancer.
So if we can make an impact, have an impact or even make some modest advances,
what we hope is to be able to help people, individuals with SCI through basic tasks
in their daily lives and be able to alleviate the health care system.
So that that's really sort of the context that we're talking about.
Thank you. Thank you.
So we see in the chat, John, your answer about non-traumatic injury,
which is not a target for the Men the Gap approach.
But could you just elaborate a little bit from your chat response
about the size of the injury in the microtubules?
And then I would like to ask you if you could comment on prospects for children
with spinal cord injury.
We haven't talked about them at all in this conversation yet.
So I'm already, as the engineer on the call, I'm already treading onto thin ice,
but maybe Karim and others can correct me if I get it wrong.
But so when there's a traumatic injury, there's typically one or more specific sites where,
you know, there's a clear loss of connection, a wound.
And our approach is to try and treat that wounded area and create a kind of a set of breadcrumbs
that the axons can follow to create some, hopefully, reconnection,
some restoration of function, which may not be, you know, it could be improved hand function,
it could be restoration of bladder function, sexual function, other things, you know,
help with blood pressure, regulation, perspiration, sweating, et cetera.
So any of those things would be a huge advance if we could do that.
The size for my crude engineering understanding shouldn't be an obstacle in the sense that
what we're doing is injecting a gel that should fill the injury and then of whatever size it is,
and then we apply the magnetic field and help with the, with the regrowth.
I don't, for non-traumatic injury, I don't have a good understanding of the mechanisms there.
What, what I have heard from my colleagues from Wolf-Tetzlaff and others is that
the mechanisms are sufficiently different, that it's unlikely that our treatment will be relevant,
but I defer to others to comment more on that.
And the question of children.
And for children, again, I, you know, I'll just give my, my engineer's answer,
which is that like with vaccines, I think that will be later in the process, but I,
I don't know if there's any fundamental reason why it would not be possible.
All right, thank you. Other, other comments on this question?
No? Okay. So I actually, I'm coming to the last question in the queue that I have before me,
but we're also coming to the end of the hour. And I'd appreciate if everyone could,
could really speak to this question. And I'll preface it by saying, saying that with the work
that my team and I did with Brian Kwan and Wolf-Tetzlaff and others on stem cell, stem cells
and spinal cord injury repair, we often found that the perspectives and priorities and values of
clinicians and researchers were very different from those of people affected with a condition
where physicians and researchers tend to have very discreet endpoints, like clinically meaningful
endpoints and infection and so forth. And the viewpoint of people with the live experience
were really far more holistic around quality of life, but not only for themselves, but around
for their families and the whole networks around them. So I'm going to ask as a last question,
how do we reconcile or how do we seek convergence between clinical endpoints and quality of life,
especially as we've discussed spinal cord injury can be very different from one person to the other.
And how do we really identify that sweet spot or sweet spots that we can really
say gave us success or give us success? And maybe Barry, we could start with you.
I think the idea of bringing together on convergence is the perfect point that
we all need to be at the same table. And then with more dialogue, you won't have people
thinking that they're doing the right thing or for or helping somebody else without the people
that want to be helped say this is what we want. And that's where the connection will be. That's
where priorities will be set. That's, well, I mean, many don't know this, but when we did our
recent, there's a famous Anderson paper of 2004. And then, of course, what we did
as a snapshot back before the NIH meetings was we asked the community and we had 1800 respondents,
you know, what's a priority in research for you? Well, mobility was fifth. Okay,
bowel, bladder, pain, sexual function. These things are more important to our community right now.
Now, does it take restorative treatment? Some of them? Yes, it does. And so that all said,
I'm sorry, it's a little long-winded, but the people with lived experience need to be talking
with the researchers and the clinicians together at the same time to come to that point. And I
think that's how you can really let it dictate itself that way. All right. Thank you, Barry. So
well stated. John? So this getting everybody together is exactly what we want to do. And,
you know, what Barry has stated is the ideal. And, you know, Judy, along with Rick Hansen,
are leading our Ethics and Knowledge Translation Committee. Andrea is involved in that too.
But it's still a challenge because we have this committee, then we need to make sure that that
information really gets disseminated through to all of the team. And so this is a challenge that
we're living at the moment and trying to find the best way of implementing it. And some of the
people on the call are involved in making sure that we spread that message. And we've had tremendous
support from Praxis, from SCIBC, you know, from Barry and others. And we're just going to keep
making sure that we keep the, as scientists and engineers, we keep checking back that we're
doing the right thing and solving the right problem and for the right reason,
which is critical. And you know, it also speaks to the upfront integration of on-the-ground
perspectives and priorities right at the beginning of the of the science and the
conceptualization of the scientific process. Karim, over to you and we'll end with a comment
from Andrea. I totally agree. But I also have to defend a little bit the researcher or,
you know, we talk about motor functions, not that important. The thing is that many researchers
and the history, again, we can look back. Why do we look at locomotion? Because it's easy to study,
right? If I do a screening for a treatment in a rat model, for example, it is much easier to study
how the leg moves than to say how is the mental health or how is the gut or sexual function in
the animal, right? That it is a matter of simplicity sometimes when you start with that. Do we have to
move on when we say, oh, yeah, this is a treatment that helps with motor function to go and really
look comprehensively at what does that treatment do? Super important because we have to keep in
mind that we have so many systems in our body and the treatment could actually be beneficial to one
and very negative to the other. And I'm talking here about pain versus motor function because
many treatments that would help to promote a motor recovery have a good chance to actually increase
pain. So yes, we have to be comprehensive and yes, we have to understand what the real problem of
people actually are. But in the beginning, in the screening, in the basic research, it is easy to go
and test more things in a simple model of motor function. Thank you, Karim. Andrew Townsend,
I'm going to give you the last word. I couldn't agree more with Karim in terms of, you know,
in defense of some of the things that have happened is that the things that are easy to measure are
the things that are easy to measure. And so whenever it's patient reported or quality of life,
it can be a little bit harder to measure. But we do have ways to measure that. And one of the things
we use a lot in rehabilitation is something called a goal attainment scale. And so that is something
where the patient themselves have, you know, there's an individual goal. And we see whether this
intervention helps them achieve that goal. And so I think it takes us back to what I said at the
very beginning, I'll come first full circles, that we're going to end up with an individualized,
personalized approach to our interventions down the road. Maybe not one, you know,
as we're doing studies, we may have that may not be, but as we're as we start to implement this and
really integrate this into patient care, we're going to have to look at that into those individual
priorities, along with the group's priorities. So. All right. Thank you so much. So well said.
So we are at the end of this community conversation, the 16th in our series on spinal cord injury
repair, where we've been and where we're going, which I think is incredibly exciting. I just want
to thank the panelists so much for your time and dedication from the research through the
translational care, translate care and translational process, what you do is extraordinary. And
I know I, along with those who have joined us today are incredibly grateful. Everyone have
a great evening. Thank you again, Mary and Bakhani for organizing us and mend the gap for
supporting this event. And to all who have joined us today and support us in all that we do. Good
night.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm here today to talk to you about a dilemma I had,
a problem that faced me years ago when I started practicing medicine.
I used to be an emergency medicine physician,
and for any young physician this was the most challenging,
most exciting job.
I had to deal with very intensive cases,
gunshot wounds, stab wounds, near drowning accidents,
scuba diving accidents, heart attacks.
I thought I could handle anything.
You name it, I've seen it.
I got it, I could handle it.
Handling such cases, I thought I could,
I mean, compared to that, anything else is trivial, is small.
I was very mistaken.
I had to deal with other issues that might seem trivial at that time to me,
but not to the patients that had them.
I had to deal with women, with headaches,
that used to come to me complaining of those horrible headaches.
They've been on medication for migraine for years and years and years.
They could hardly take care of their kids, their families, their job.
They could hardly sleep properly.
They started to be snappy.
They started to get depressed.
I had other men coming to me complaining that they are being offered jobs,
but because of their lower back pain,
they started to decline such a job
if the job entailed that you have to travel a lot, for example.
I had to do something about that.
I felt helpless.
I had to change this.
And I kept hearing about this new specialty to me at the time
called chiropractic.
I heard from patients that came to me to the office and said,
you know, Doc, I was in, let's say, Chicago,
and I had a horrible back pain.
I couldn't do anything.
They took me to this physician, this chiropractor,
and I went in crawling in his office.
He did something, and I came out fine.
It's like nothing ever happened.
He got those magic hands.
I got hung up on that, the magic hands.
But on the other hand, I heard other people saying,
you know, those squacks, they crack your neck,
you end up with a stroke.
That was too dramatic, too conflicting.
I had to find the truth.
I had to find it, and the urge was so strong enough
that I had to change what I was doing.
I decided to pursue that, and I did.
I went back to school.
It took me four years to finish that.
Let me talk to you about this chiropractic.
Chiro means hands in Latin.
Practic means done by hand, practiced by hand.
The story starts in the year 1895
with a practitioner called Diddy Palmer.
One time he was going into the building
where he had his practice, and a gentleman that worked there
complained to him that while he was lifting something
and turning, something popped.
And right after that, he lost hearing with one of his ears.
So Diddy Palmer examined him,
thought he felt something unusual in the neck,
so he went and pushed on it, and it cracked.
And suddenly this gentleman regained his hearing.
That was very intriguing to Diddy Palmer,
and it started a thought process
and started a new profession.
It developed from a very simple form
or a very simple theory of bone out of place,
bone pressing on nerves,
that it affects the function of the bodies
to the more sophisticated form that we have it today,
under the name of neuro, musculoskeletal nerve,
muscles tendons, skeleton,
which is joints, ligaments, tendons.
Today we have great institutes,
like the American Chiropractic Association,
the World Chiropractic Association,
the North American Spine Society,
very prestigious, very heavy institutes
with a lot of evidence-based medicine behind it.
Lots of techniques are being used in that field,
mostly focused on the spine.
It starts, or it goes from the very simple way,
the way people know it, that if you ask anybody,
anything about chiropractic, they would say,
those guys that crack bones.
We don't really crack bones.
What we do, or the simplest form of what we do,
is actually we affect the joints.
We basically deliver high velocity,
low impact thrusts over the spine.
We realize that by doing that,
we can actually influence the capsules
around the joints in between the vertebra,
where I could easily start developing
a nerve series of stimulation
that actually affects the human body
in a very different way.
A gentleman by the name of Carrick, a great physician,
discovered that we can actually affect
your brain perception of pain.
Pain is an experience, ladies and gentlemen.
It's not a sensation.
When you get a bruise or a bump,
the brain perceives this feeling, this obnoxious feeling,
and thinks about it and says,
should I cry?
Should I be worried?
Should I just ignore it?
That's how we perceive pain.
So we realize we can actually affect that
by doing those simple moves that we can do.
A great professor, Professor Jim Cox,
developed another technique where he realized
that by just affecting the joints,
intervertebral joints between the vertebra,
we can actually increase the pressure,
decrease the pressure within the disc.
So the disc that is bulging in people with disc herniations
can actually be reduced.
Not just that.
We increase this space by about 28%.
That's dramatic.
We could also approximate the edges of that disc herniation
so the disc can heal.
And by doing so, it imbibes fluid
and pushes one vertebra above and the other one below,
just enlarging the space for those nerves.
We realized we can actually affect your posture.
Haven't you noticed when you talk to colleagues,
sometimes you're standing in a circle
or you're talking with someone with you at the office,
that they're basically standing with their head tilted this way?
And having a very intelligent conversation with you,
not realizing what they're doing,
what they don't know is that half of their brain
thinks they're actually shifted the other way around.
So it's trying to bring you to the opposite side
while your eyes are trying to correct that.
We found out that we can properly change that.
Why do we want to change it?
Because if you're standing this way,
I have my spine twisted.
I have an S-shaped spine.
I have my pelvis a bit twisted backwards.
So by correcting that with a simple move,
stimulating the other half of the brain
to bring you back to the original position,
we can help you fix your posture.
Why do you want to fix your posture?
Because we don't want you to have a headache from the neck.
We don't want you to have low back pain.
We don't want you to have any pain.
Another gentleman, Dr. Michael Lee,
he came up with a technique where we can actually release
the muscles, the tendons, the nerves,
alleviate the bad effects of friction
in between those structures.
We were designed to move.
But the problem is we sold our bodies to comfort.
Lots of people are in their office.
They don't bother moving and going to see their colleague
right next door in the other office.
They basically pick up the phone and call them.
I have some clients coming to my office,
mommy and son, and if they have to wait
five or six or seven minutes and I pass by,
I see them basically doing this thing.
Everybody's texting.
Everybody is surfing.
That can't be good for our bodies.
Our bodies are so geniusly designed
that they actually adapt it to what we do,
but also to what we don't do.
Let's say I raise my arm.
I have employed maybe nine muscles to do this move,
but there is a certain pattern of firing for those muscles.
Because of the postural issues, we disturbed this pattern.
And using the techniques we're using at the moment,
we managed to reeducate the muscle fibers
to do a better job at that.
I am fortunate enough to have a few athletes,
some of the world ranking number ones coming to my office.
We call them highly conditioned athletes.
And I often tell them it's easier to get to be number one
than to stay in that club, club number one.
The issue is we're trying to fix the racing car
while it's in the race.
We're not trying to take it out into the garage
and then fix it.
That's the whole idea of this new approach.
My idea and actually our approach,
if I'm talking to my fellow physicians,
I would say we have to really let go
of the classic way that we learned in medical schools
of being so tunnel visioned,
of only looking at somebody with a sprained ankle
with a torn ligament and forgetting the rest of the body.
Don't you think by the time this torn ligament got torn,
a bunch of other structures have been stressed to the limit?
That's basically where we're focused.
I'd rather approach the problem
with a non-invasive, less damaging,
more effective way than the other alternative ways
like medication, where at the end of the day,
the problem doesn't get resolved,
the patient develops side effects,
some people get nauseated, some people vomit,
even vomit blood, or some get hooked on the medication.
And at the end, what I used to do as an emergency physician
is basically refer them out.
I got rid of the patient.
It was the only thing I thought the right thing to do.
I got them to the surgeon.
And very few cases came back happy with that.
I think we have to focus more on these new approaches.
I wouldn't think of it as the alternative.
Usually when I have patients coming to my office,
they say, Doc, you're number seven on the list.
I've been everywhere.
So I became the alternative way of thinking.
Nothing really worked, or they were scared of doing other procedures.
So they came to me.
I believe that the best way to frame what we do now
with chiropractic, sports, and spine medicine
with neuromuscular skeletal medicine,
call it whatever you're comfortable with,
is to frame it as the new unconventional,
least damaging, evidence-based approach.
We have to embrace that.
We have to keep our minds open.
We have to try that as the first option.
And if this doesn't work, then I have to think of the alternative.
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you.
How do nerves work? Are nerves simply the wires in the body that conduct electricity
like the wires in the walls of your home or in your computer? This is an analogy often
made but the reality is that nerves have a much more complex job in the body. They are
not just the wires but the cells that are the sensors, detectors of the external and
internal world, the transducers that convert information to electrical impulses, the wires
that transmit these impulses, the transistors that gate the information and turn up or down
the volume and finally the activators that take that information and cause it to have
an effect on other organs. Consider this, your mother gently strokes your forearm and
you react with pleasure or a spider crawls on your forearm and you startle and slap it
off or you brush your forearm against a hot rack while removing a cake from the oven and
you immediately recoil. Light touch, produced pleasure, fear or pain. How can one kind of
cell have so many functions? Nerves are in fact bundles of cells called neurons and each
of these neurons is highly specialized to carry nerve impulses, their form of electricity,
in response to only one kind of stimulus and in only one direction. The nerve impulse starts
with a receptor, a specialized part of each nerve where the electrical impulse begins.
One nerve's receptor might be a thermal receptor designed only to respond to a rapid increase
in temperature. Another receptor type is attached to the hairs of the forearm, detecting movement
of those hairs such as when a spider crawls on your skin. Yet another kind of neuron is
low threshold mechanoreceptor, activated by light touch. Each of these neurons then carry
their specific information, pain, warning, pleasure and that information is projected
to specific areas of the brain and that is the electrical impulse.
The inside of a nerve is a fluid that is very rich in the ion potassium. It is 20 times
higher than in the fluid outside the nerve while that outside fluid has 10 times more
sodium than the inside of the nerve. This imbalance between sodium outside and potassium
inside the cell results in the inside of the nerve having a negative electrical charge
relative to the outside of the nerve, about equal to minus 70 or minus 80 millivolts. This
is called the nerve's resting potential. But in response to that stimulus, the nerve
is designed to detect pores in the cell wall near the receptor of the cell open. These
pores are specialized protein channels that are designed to let sodium rush into the nerve.
The sodium ions rush down their concentration gradient and when they do, the inside of the
nerve becomes more positively charged, about plus 40 millivolts. While this happens initially
in the nerve right around the receptor, if the change in the nerve's electrical charge
is great enough, if it reaches what is called threshold, the nearby sodium ion channels
open and then the ones nearby those and so on and so forth, so that the positivity spreads
along the nerve's membrane to the nerve's cell body and then along the nerve's long
thread-like extension, the axon. Meanwhile, potassium ion channels open, potassium rushes
out of the nerve and the membrane voltage returns to normal, actually overshooting it
a bit. And during this overshoot, the nerve is resistant to further depolarization. It
is refractory, which prevents the nerve electrical impulse from traveling backwards. Then, ion
pumps pump the sodium back out of the nerve and the potassium back into the nerve, restoring
the nerve to its normal resting state. The end of the nerve, the end of the axon communicates
with the nerve's target. This target will be other nerves in a specialized area of the
spinal cord to be processed and then transmitted up to the brain. Or, the nerve's target
may be another organ, such as a muscle. When the electrical impulse reaches the end of
the nerve, small vesicles or packets containing chemical neurotransmitters are released by
the nerve and rapidly interact with the nerve's target. This process is called synaptic transmission
because the connection between the nerve and the next object in the chain is called a synapse.
And it is here, in the synapse, that the neuron's electrical information can be modulated, amplified,
blocked altogether or translated to another informational process.
Hi guys, Dr. Dillard here once again with another YouTube video.
Finally I've done it.
At long last I've created a YouTube video that is dedicated to the cervical spine.
This video will be the first, hopefully in a series.
The next one after this will be how to read your cervical MRI.
But before you can read your cervical MRI, you have to understand the unique anatomy
of the cervical spine.
So that's what we're going to cover in this video.
Specifically we're going to talk about the osteology of all the bones.
There's seven bones in the cervical spine, including atlas and axis.
We're going to talk about the muscles and particularly about the ligaments.
I'm going to hit the ligaments a little harder.
I'm not going into origin and insertion and things like that.
It's not going to be that deep.
We'll talk about some basic neural anatomy, specifically about the difference between
nerve rootlets versus, say, sensory nerve root versus a spinal nerve, dorsal root ganglia,
anti-rhamis, post-heramis, medial branch, things like that.
That kind of anatomy, just to sort that out.
Then we'll talk about the cervical disc.
I put together a little cartoon series on how a disc goes from a normal disc to a degenerated
disc to an annular tear to a disc herniation, and a bunch of pathology we'll cover.
And in fact, let's look at that a little more closely here.
So there's the table.
At least gave you the slides.
I'm going to leave this all intact.
I think I don't think I'm going to break this down.
But there's the things that I went over and where they are.
And then pathology is scattered throughout.
I didn't have time to pick the slide numbers out.
But we'll talk about cervical ribs versus hypertrophic transverse processes.
About a kyphotic, I'll show you an example of a kyphotic cervical spine.
We'll talk about some biomechanics.
Uncle vertebral joint hypertrophy.
Many of you have never heard the word uncle vertebral joint in your lives, yet I have
clients who have ended up getting cervical surgery to fix problems like that.
So we need to talk about what that is, and I'll show you a recent case where one became
severely degenerated to the point.
It caused radiculopathy even.
We'll talk about a hemivirtebrate really briefly, some stenosis.
Just here, ponticle.
You probably don't even know what that is.
And then we'll talk about some degeneration and some of its sequelae.
Well, I already said that.
That's going to be in the cervical MRI section.
We'll talk about annular tear and herniation.
All right.
With that said, let's get moving.
All right.
Cervical anatomy review.
Now I apologize in advance.
My studio here is not super soundproof, and we have kids and all sorts of dogs, and everybody's
shelter in place right now, right?
So they're running wild, so I apologize in advance for any background noises you might
hear.
All right.
So you need to understand, we are explaining this at the beginning.
You've got to understand the MRI of the cervical spine, or the gross anatomy before you can
understand what the MRI anatomy is.
So this is really important.
If you're not up to this, you probably shouldn't bother looking at your MRI images because
you won't understand them.
So what is the start from the beginning?
What does the cervical spine do?
Well, it supports the head and the neck.
There's a cervical spine right here.
And yeah, there's your brain up there and your skull.
You can see the skull casing.
And yeah, it's kind of a pole that your head and neck sits on.
It also protects part of the central nervous system called the spinal cord.
Spinal cord goes through the vertebral canal here.
So that's really important as well.
So we'll look at that.
And it allows for motion.
When you turn your head to the right, when you turn your head to the left, how do you
think that happens?
It happens via the pole, which has seven segments on it, and they can articulate and move.
So it's super important.
In fact, the cervical allows more motion than the thoracic or the lumbar.
Here's just a CTI threw up here of a patient with a spinal fusion that didn't go so well
but this is a scout CT view.
The point of this though, you can see the head.
You can see the skull quite nicely.
And you can see right in the middle of that, the neck, and there's the larynx and trachea.
You can see right in the middle of all this, there's the cervical spine supporting everything.
All right, some basics of the cervical spine.
There are seven bones.
They're called vertebrae, plural.
Each bone is called the vertebrae.
These bones are similar to lumbar bones that we've already studied, but they're much smaller.
They're also stacked on top of one another to form a tower.
If you look at the side view, there should be a lordotic type curve with a concavity
posteriorly.
We'll look at that in a second.
If you look straight from the front or the back at someone's spine, cervical spine, just
like the thoracic and lumbar, it should be straight.
It shouldn't be bent off to the side.
So here is a posterior to anterior view.
You can see the back of someone's skull.
And here is a very straight and normal looking cervical spine.
We could put that patient in a side view, actually I used just a standard radiograph here.
Same picture, you can see the jaw would be coming out here.
The nose is here and the eyes are out here.
But there's a cervical spine and it has, from a lateral view or sagittal view, it has a
curve like this.
You can say it's concave here on the back, or you can say it's convex on the front.
So having a straight spine and a lordotic spine in the cervical region is very important.
Specifically, the bones are designed to carry the weight of the head and the weight of gravity.
And therefore you have normal biomechanics, normal movement and your ranges of motion,
your planes of motion are not messed up with regard to load.
But if you have messed up biomechanics, then you're going to have some problems.
So if you have normal biomechanics, you have normal wear and tear, cervical spine should
last a long time barring injury.
So alignment or abnormal biomechanics will lead to a wearing out and unequal wearing
out of the spine.
And that creates something called degenerative changes.
Degenerative changes are the root of pain, the producing pathologies, aside from traumatic
fractures and tumors and other things, cancer infiltration.
Most of the time, pain in the neck starts from, there's a precursor to it, and it starts
with some abnormal biomechanics, and that wears something out ahead of time and that
wrecks the disc and or the facet joints.
So pain producing pathologies, two general categories are degenerative disc disease.
That's problems with the disc because it degenerated or arthritis, aka spondylosis, spondylitis.
These are all arthritis, just degenerative changes of the bones, namely the facet joints.
Okay, here's that normal.
This is a CT view now.
So we have a slice right down the middle.
That's where we can see the vertebral canal quite nicely here.
But if you look at this patient, so let's get you orientated, we'll learn about the
dens as the best way to see which way is forward and which way is back.
This is C2 or called the axis.
This pole-like looking structure, which we don't see anywhere else, that always goes
forward.
And you can see the oral pharynx is here, you can see the epiglottis, the larynx, trachea
is here.
That's another way to tell.
This is forward.
This is a normal C-shaped curve, the kyphosis here or the concavity is posterior.
This is another one of my patients not too long ago, and you can see that the curve is
all messed up.
Not only is it not lordotic, it's actually kyphotic.
It's went backwards and that creates all sorts of biomechanical problems.
So how do you keep or what makes a normal alignment, assuming that your bones are formed
normally?
Well, muscles and ligaments are the key to keeping those bones in place, those little
square blocks.
So you have to have properly functioning muscles, especially properly functioning ligaments.
Part of the problem with degenerative change in some cases, the ligaments wear out and
they get loose and they allow too much movement between adjacent bones and that can wear them
out.
So that's important.
So dysfunction of the muscles or ligaments may lead to dysfunctional biomechanics.
Biomechanics may lead to degenerative change, it wears out the motion segment.
What's a motion segment again?
Just quick recap.
So if we have a bone here, there's the spinous process, so this is the side view.
Here's another bone below it.
We have a disc in the middle.
This is a motion segment.
So it's a vertebra or vertebra disc vertebra sandwich.
So if this is C4, T4, whatever, L4, anywhere, this would be called the L4 slash L5 motion
segment.
Same in the cervical.
So when I say motion segment, I'm talking about two adjacent vertebrae in the disc
in between.
Okay.
All right.
So dysfunctional muscles and ligaments can lead to screwed up biomechanics.
Screwed up biomechanics wears out the motion segment and creates degenerative change which
can turn into sometimes but not always chronic pain.
Some of the main muscles, so these are key muscles, of course, you students studying
for boards.
You're going to need to know origins, insertions, nerve supply to all these muscles, the action
of these muscles.
I'm not going that deep into this.
But some big players here are the SCM muscles, sternocleidomastoid, the upper fibers of
the trapezius muscles here.
Then we have the semi-spinalis capidus, splenius capidus muscles.
These are kind of some major big players here that keep things in check.
We have, what else do we have?
The strap muscles in the front, you'll learn that in gross two anatomy.
No gross one anatomy will teach you that.
Strap muscles, sternohioid, thyroidohioid, and we'll go into all those, omohioid digastric
muscles, stylohyoid muscles come down from this region, connect into the hyoid bone down
here.
Major deep muscles, some of them.
Now if you go deep, great board stuff right here, boards absolutely love this triangle.
Make sure you know that.
This is, we cut away the semi-spinalis capidus and splenius capidus.
If you look underneath this, there's this cool little triangle right here.
You got to know the muscles of the triangle.
I'm talking to the medical students and chiropractic students, et cetera, right now.
You lay people don't need to know this, but it's good to appreciate how complicated cervical
spine anatomy is.
Here's the bones underneath here.
For you primary healthcare provider students, rectus capidus posterior major is part of
the more medial part of the triangle.
We have oblicus capidus inferior, oblicus capidus superior here.
That is the so-called suboccipital triangle.
Who cares about the triangle?
There's something inside the triangle.
V2 is, actually that should be V3.
Sorry about that.
That's an error.
Let's fix that on the video for you people who might be watching this silently.
It's actually V3.
This is also V3 right here of the vertebra artery.
Inside the triangle, we have V3.
We also have the dorsoramus of C1, which actually is the nerve that supplies these muscles with
life.
This is also called the suboccipital nerve.
All right, so ligaments are also important.
There's some familiar ligaments we've talked about in other videos.
There's the anterior longitudinal ligament right here.
There's the posterior longitudinal ligament.
Those hold these little blocks together.
There's the inner vertebra disc holds the little blocks together.
When you get up higher in the cervical spine, the posterior longitudinal ligament, once
you get up to C2, changes names and becomes the tectoral membrane.
We'll look at that a little more closely when we get into it, but these ligaments and
your longitudinal ligament, posterior longitudinal ligament, they go all the way down to the
lumbar spine, so these are common.
If we go this way, well, everybody has, these are the zygopathosyl joints or facet joints.
They all have a capsule around them, so that's called the capsular ligament, but this one
is super important, right?
Clinically, we'll talk about this.
This yellow one is called ligamentum flavum, and that is found all the way down to the
lumbar spine.
That holds the posterior arches together, and we'll look at what I mean by posterior
arch here in a minute, or vertebral arch, I should call it.
There's only one weird place.
The ligamentum flavum changes names above C1.
Actually, it connects to the posterior arch of C1 to the occiput.
This is called the posterior glantoccipital membrane.
Can be clinically important because it's associated with something called the posterior
ponticus, and we'll look at that when the time comes, right?
If we cut away the spinous process and look from a P to A view, we can see some really
deep ligaments.
We've removed the posterior arch, so ligamentum flavum is gone, the spinal cord is gone.
We see the posterior longitudinal ligament changes in to the tectoral membrane right
here.
Okay?
Kind of looked at that from a side.
If you take off the tectoral membrane, if you scrape that off, we have a really important
cluster of ligaments that are super deep.
This is the cruciform ligament because it looks like a cross.
This one coming across right here, that is the transverse ligament of atlas.
That is very important for the stability of C1 and C2.
Some of you who have rheumatoid arthritis who are watching this video, rheumatoid arthritis
is an autoimmune attack against ligaments.
Oh, rheumatoid arthritis.
They can get an inflammation and destruction of this ligament, and they can lose stability
between C1 and C2.
They get in a car accident, they can die from this because the ligament isn't there to prevent
the spinal cord from being injured because of the lack of instability.
That's a super important ligament, the transverse ligament of atlas.
It has superior fibers, inferior fibers.
We'll look at these more specifically in a little while, though.
Ligamentum aflavin, I said that's super important clinically.
It's paired.
There's one on each side.
It connects the adjacent lamina together, so it basically stabilizes the posterior columns.
We'll take a look, several pictures, we'll look at it.
Specifically, it hooks the anterior-inferior surface of the superior vertebrae with the
posterior-superior surface of the inferior vertebrae.
So anterior-inferior surface of the top bone, and it runs to the posterior-superior surface
of the inferior bone.
Super important for stabilizing the spine everywhere, lumbar, thoracic.
Less important than thoracic because you have ribs, but especially important in the cervical
spine.
It runs between from C1, the bottom inferior C1, C2, all the way through L5, S1.
It's normally about 5 millimeters thick, but it thins out in the cervical spine.
Best seen if you're ant-man and jump inside the vertebral canal and look backwards.
That's the best way to see it.
So here's that view.
This is anterior to posterior view, but the vertebral body, let's change my color.
So the vertebral body would be right here, be blocking our view.
So the vertebral body is connected to the posterior arch by these pedicles.
So if you cut the pedicles, you can pull off the anterior body and see quite nicely.
We pulled out the spinal cord or the caudoquina, wherever you're talking, it's all the same
in the spine.
But here you can see the lamina here and here, and you can see ligamentum flavum quite nicely.
We'll talk about why it's yellow.
In fact, ligamentum flavum means yellow ligament.
So we'll talk about it.
It's kind of stretchy.
It's springy, and we'll look at that here in a second.
Here's a cadaver view of the same view, maybe twisted just a little bit, and you can see
ligamentum flavum right here, and the lamina or the roof of the vertebral canal is right
here.
There's a roof.
There's the pedicles cut here and here.
So kind of A to P with a little bleakness there.
It goes out, so it connects not only the lamina together, but it also connects to the facet
joint itself.
It supports the facet joint capsule.
There's three variations that have been described of the ligamentum flavum.
Some don't actually support the capsule.
Some go about halfway across the capsule, and another version goes all the way and completely
covers.
I'll show you a picture here in a second.
They usually blend together.
The right side and the left side come together.
Sometimes it even intermingles with fibers from the anterior part of the inner spinous
ligament, but C2 ligamentum flavum is very thin, and that's C2 is actually pierced by
C2 spinal nerve, and some Punjabi demonstrate in a study that's not even there and some
people.
Okay, here's a nice picture.
So this is an overhead view.
Here's the spinous, and we'll get to these parts in a minute, but spinous process.
Here's the lamina, lamina, and here is ligamentum flavum.
This is the type of ligamentum flavum that completely covers the capsule.
So look who's, it's pretty close to the nerve, the X-City nerve roots here.
You don't want to compress these things, so it's clinically important here.
So there it is, ligamentum flavum.
So histologically, there's a yellow elastin, so the fibers of ligamentum flavum are blended
with yellow elastin, which gives it a yellow look, but more important than the color.
It's really contractile in nature.
If you cut it out and put it on the table, it kind of shrinks and soaks together, because
well, maybe I'm exaggerating a little bit there, but it pulls together is one of the
important things.
So it has ability to contract, and that actually can aid in extension if you flex your neck
forward, when you start to pull your neck back, it contracts and helps pull the neck
very subtly, but it does.
If you lose that contractibility, that contractibility is important to get it out of the way when
you are extending the cervical spine or bending the cervical spine back, because if it contracts,
it won't buckle.
Degenerative changes can cause the ligamentum flavum to stop or to lose its contractile
property, and therefore when you bend back, instead of shrinking out of the way, it can
bulge or buckle forward, and it can pinch the spinal cord itself.
That's called stenosis, and that's not a good thing.
The buckling, if in the lumbar spine, it can compress the caudoquina.
This is normally accompanied by loss of disc height, which makes things worse, but if it
gets bad enough, it can compress the spinal cord, and you can get something called myelopathy,
which is very serious, or radiculopathy, usually more in the lumbar spine.
Both of those are clinically important and cause significant pain and disability in people.
Degenerative changes, everything I just said, degenerative changes cause the ligament to
dry out and lose its contraction ability, and therefore if it starts to buckle by itself
cause it doesn't shrink anymore, it can start to irritate the posterior part of the spinal
cord, caudoquine, everything I said, which results in something called central stenosis.
We'll look at an example of that in a minute.
Degenerative disc disease, which decreases the height of the disc, kind of burns away
the disc, that can make it worse, especially with degenerative change, because it can buckle
forward and lead to stenosis as well.
I have a video on stenosis that's actually very popular, so I encourage you to look at
my other videos, cause I can't explain everything in one video.
This one's long enough as it is.
For reasons we don't understand, another common problem is ligamentum flavum hypertrophy.
Ligamentum flavum can get really ridiculously thick in some people, and if it gets thick,
it can start to narrow or pinch on the spinal cord or the caudoquine down in the lumbar
spine, and that can cause pain and dysfunction because of that.
Here's a good example.
So here's an old client, 2016.
Here's a normal overhead view.
We can see the disc here, my students, especially if you went through my first core spinal anatomy
course, you'll know exactly what this is.
There is the thick sac and the nerves of the caudoquine hanging out here.
Everybody's happy.
Superarticular process of the bone below.
The process is right here.
Together, that's the facet joint, or zegapathosyl joint, or Z-joint.
In school, you'll learn it as the zegapathosyl joint.
In the real world, it's the facet joint, and I've explained that before, and if you have
class with me coming up, we'll talk about why.
But anyway, this is normal.
If this is L, it looks like L4.
There's the L4 traversing or exiting nerve roots, dorsal root ganglis are here, and there's
the traversing L5 roots, so everybody's happy.
Ligamentum flavum.
Look at this.
See this little black thing right here?
That's a normal ligamentum flavum.
It shouldn't be any thicker than that.
There it is.
This is the type that doesn't go all the way around.
Now pop over to this image.
Here's another client of mine a couple years ago.
He couldn't walk more than a couple blocks, and his legs felt like they were walking through
cement and burned and had back pain with this.
Look at ligamentum flavum in this guy.
It's went crazy.
Look at it.
It's ridiculous.
We don't know what causes this.
It's like benign prosthetic hyperplasia.
Guys get that prostate growth, and it pinches the urethra, and you can't go to the bathroom.
What causes the prostate to go, we're not 100% sure.
But there it is.
It's ridiculous.
Instead of having a big and beautiful looking caudoquina, here's the caudoquina in this
person smashed up in this little ball.
This is epidural fat back here in this white stuff.
That's central stenosis.
That's a big problem.
I talk to people all the time with this.
They also had a slip here.
You can see the slip of the inferior ticular process.
They had a degenerative spondylolisthesis.
Try not to do too many digressions because this is a long PowerPoint.
What else can mess up the normal biomechanics?
Well, normally the bones are like little rectangles.
What if one's not rectangular in shape?
That happens.
Occasionally it's rare, but it can happen.
So sometimes you can get a triangular shape vertebrae.
That's called a hemivertebra.
And that's a problem.
These are just like kids' building blocks because of this one's triangular shaped, and
this is an A to P view looking from the front.
Or we could say we're looking at the back of post-hurt anterior view.
But because this is tipped, this one has tip.
So you get yourself a scoliosis wherever this occurs.
If it occurs in the cervical spine, get yourself a cervical scoliosis.
I got a nice video on scoliosis as well that you can look for on my YouTube channel.
Again, most of my videos are pretty deep.
They're not super, super simple.
Most of my coaching clients, I refer to these videos because if they get up to speed on
this anatomy, it helps them, and I can save time during the coaching session.
Focus on their problem rather than explaining anatomy to them.
So here's a patient who was born with a hemivertebrae.
So there's C4, C3, C2.
They're considered kind of accessory ossicles, but that's a hemivertebrae, and it's a little
triangle that has worms.
Sometimes in thoracic spine, you can have ribs attached to them.
They can have no ribs, but that's no good, right?
It completely messed up the biomechanics, and now he's starting to wear out his insinate
processes and his facet joints, and it's got chronic pain on top of the scoliosis.
Here's another one on plain radiograph, very common.
But watch out for this.
Always count pedicles, so pedicle, pedicle, pedicle, pedicle right there, the little
eyes.
If you don't know what I'm talking about, I have videos on how to read your lumbar MRI
and how to read your cervical, or not MRI, but X-rays.
So go look at those if you're kind of lost on this.
But if you count pedicles, there's one here, and there's one here, but we have an extra
one right there.
So that little triangle is almost what we showed above.
That's between T1 and T2.
I drew it in.
If you're having trouble seeing it, I drew it in right here, and yep, that caused the
scoliosis and resulted in chronic pain.
So now let's dig into, you know, I never know, should I put this part first, or should I,
do I talk about the curves first, or do I talk about the vertebrae first?
So I just went with the curves first, but now let's get down to this vertebrae here
and really look at the parts of the vertebrae.
Again, there's seven cervical vertebrae.
They're stacked on top of each other.
Here they are.
There's C1, it's called atlas.
C2 is called axis.
These don't have any special names, C3, C4, C5, C6, C7.
Sometimes this is called the vertebral prominence because it sticks out farther than the other
spinous processes.
So we have typical and atypical.
The typical ones, those of you who have went through my lumbar training, you'll know they're
very similar in structure.
So C3 through C6 are considered typical cervical vertebrae.
C6 is kind of, it's still in there, but it can be a little weird sometimes.
C3 through C5 have a double, like a snake tongue for a spinous process.
C6 sometimes doesn't have that and has a regular straight spinous process, but it's
still, according to Kramer, classified as typical.
The weird ones are atlas C1, axis C2.
These two guys are strange and we'll take a look at those in a bit.
Those are classified as atypical cervical vertebrae.
C7 is not typical because I won't get into all the things, but its spinous process is
really long.
It's never by-fid.
We'll never say never, but it's almost never by-fid and not as strange as atlas and axis,
but it's strange.
We'll look at that a little bit more, I'll tell you why it's strange in a bit.
So here's the typical C3 through C6.
There's typical vertebrae.
Here's the ligaments.
We've already looked at these.
I didn't show you the back ligaments, but if you went through my lumbar series, you know
this is the inter-spinous ligament right here.
In the cervical region, we have a different ligament in back here.
This is called ligamentum nuke, or the nucleoligament, and this is different.
We don't have that in the thoracic or lumbar spine.
C7, that's the end of it right there.
The other weird thing about ligaments in the cervical spine, this is the supraspinous
ligament, this gray thick one here that runs on the tip of the spinous processes.
We don't have that in the cervical spine.
We have it, but it's considered part of ligamentum nuke.
There's three parts.
Some authors say two, some authors say three.
We're going to go with Kramer and Standring, which is the big thick, that black book, that
black gray anatomy.
So they just say two parts.
Some authors actually include the inter-spinous ligament, which is right here.
They include that as part of ligamentum nuke.
So there you go.
The ligamentum flavum are still the same until we get up higher, so facet joint capsules
are the same.
Part of a typical.
So let's go through these parts.
I'm not going to go crazy on this, but I will list them for you.
You chiropractic students and medical students and physical therapy students, you guys need
to know every nuke and cranny of this bone.
You lay people out there.
If you're going to have a coaching session with me, you better know something about this
because I'm going to, I'll assume that you know what the lamina is and the spinous process
is and the vertebral body is here in the middle.
The unsonate process, as I'll show you a case I had not too long ago, with unsonate problems
with this unsonate process, these Batman ears, you got to know what those are.
Those aren't seen anywhere else in the spine.
The transverse processes are weird.
Normally there's just one strut for a transverse process or some authors call these bars.
I think standard calls them bars, so you probably won't see strut on board, but I like strut.
So there's an anterior and a posterior strut or anterior and posterior bar.
So your transverse processes are double strutted creature.
And then there's this inter tubercular lamellae, which kind of fuses them together.
There's a big bump here and here.
Those are called the tubercles, the anterior and posterior tubercle.
They're muscle attachment sites that are important.
You can see them.
I labeled them over here.
So kind of a weird design.
There's another hole in the transverse.
We don't have holes in the transverse.
You've never seen this before in the lumbar spine, but here we have vertebral arteries
will pass through here on each side.
So these are really important.
All right.
There's this facet of the superarticular process.
The pillar, we'll look at that from the side to get everything.
It has a pedicle as well.
So the pedicle is kind of part of the strut.
They post your strut here, kind of morphs, kind of blends in with the pedicle, but it's
still very hard piece of bone, lamina, bifid spinous process.
See how it's got two little fins here to match the two little struts of the transverse
process.
Okay.
So it's good to know this stuff.
And you healthcare provider students, you got to know that stuff.
Here's a side view, sagittal view.
I talk about the articular pillar a lot in the side view.
We can see this is the articular pillar.
I put it in pink here or purple or I don't know what color that is, but there it is.
So if you draw a line right about here, that's kind of the halfway point between the articular
pillar, anything above this, oh, I can draw it right.
I got my tools out here for you.
So right about here is the midway point.
Anything above this, superarticular process, anything below this, inferior articular process.
We can see a little pad right here.
There's in the living, there's a pad of Highland cartilage here and that's the articular cartilage.
So that's called the facet of the inferior articular process.
Or you could call it the inferior articular or you could call it the now the facet of
the inferior articular process or you could call it inferior articular facet I guess too.
The other one is hidden on the back side, it would be over here, but those are facets.
Those are your Z joints.
Those are your facet joints.
We can see the struts of the transverse processes coming out of the plane of the page here and
here.
We can see this weird looking thing because I mean here the vertebral body is kind of
rectangular, right?
What in the heck is that?
That's called an unsonate process.
So it forms a joint and we'll look at that here in a second, I want to get too far ahead.
All right, there's the spinous process.
Everybody you lay people who don't know this, everybody put your hand, your fingers of your
right hand, it doesn't matter what hand, put your fingers right in the back of your head,
right in the center where that little bump is on the hair and the back of your head.
Now run your fingers down your neck and as you come to where your neck attaches to your
trunk you're going to feel some big bumps.
Are you feeling spinous process, this thing right here?
Those are the things that stick out, right?
Here's a nice oblique view, very busy.
We can see the vertebral body in the front.
There's a transverse process, there's a transverse frame and we talked about.
There's our articular pillar from this view, spinous process.
There's our lamina, a vertebral end plate.
Here's a nice view of these Batman ears, articular processes that pop up.
They're part of a joint called the oncal vertebral joint that I got slides coming here.
This is important right here as well.
There's a notch here and that's because it's on the superior part of the vertebrae, that's
called the superior vertebral notch.
That makes up the bottom half of this hole which transmits the spinal nerves.
This is a very important thing, but notice that the insinate process and the superior
articular process, they make up the borders of this hole.
Guess what happens if you get arthritic change?
What if you get a bone spur that grows like this?
It can shish kebab the nerve right there and you can have pain going down your upper extremity
from this type of arthritic change.
Look at that a little more.
This is important down here too.
That is the facet for the oncinate process.
The facet for the oncinate process.
This would connect to Batman's ears up here.
We can't see the one below, but the one below would be connecting right, if I could draw
it right through, it would be connecting to it like this underneath.
These two together, the oncinate process and the facet for the oncinate process make
up a new joint, which is semi diarthrodial.
Don't have those anywhere else in the spine, only in the cervical spine.
It's got a capsule around it.
It's got some synovial fluid, a little controversial if it's a true diarthroial joint or not.
I think I covered all that stuff there.
Oncovertibular joints, super important concept to your cervical spine patients, especially
with arthritis.
They're also called the lusca joints or the joints of van lusca after the guy who discovered
it or the oncovertibular joints of van lusca.
Oncovertibular joints is what I usually call them or sometimes I just call them lusca joints.
Only in the cervical spine and they're not everywhere in the cervical spine.
C1 and C2 at less than access, don't have them.
They're the most prominent at C4, 5, and 6.
They are made by two pieces, the oncinate process.
Sometimes that's called the uncus and that connects with the facet for the oncinate process,
which we just talked about.
They look like Batman's ears.
There's the two parts again, the oncinate process, I already said this, uncus.
You can read through this because I just talked about that.
It's kind of a semi diarthrodial joint because it does have synovial cells and there is some
synovial slipperiness, but it doesn't usually have a complete full capsule.
It's similar to the SI joint, sacred iliac joint.
Sacred iliac joint is more diarthrodial, but it doesn't have a posterior capsule, so it's
kind of in the categories with that.
If you don't know what Batman ears are, there is Batman's.
See, don't they look like Batman's ears?
Who are those guys?
Those are the oncinate processes or the uncus.
There they are.
I guess I should have gotten the camera down a little lower, but you can see the ridge of
these things right here.
All right.
Let's go.
Clinically super important, they provide lateral stability to the cervical spine.
There's no ribs, so we need something to stabilize the spine, and that's why the committee
developed these things.
They make up the anterior and anterior lateral border of the neural foramen, which I showed
you.
I demonstrated a bone spur, which compressed or decreased the size of a neural foramen.
Neural foramen is the hole.
We'll look at those a little more specifically in a minute, but that's the hole where the
spinal nerves leave the spine through.
They can cause radiculopathy, radicular pain.
They're also close to the vertebral artery, so sometimes it doesn't happen that often,
but you can get your vertebral artery compressed by uncus spurring or oncinate process spurring.
All right.
So here's a cartoon.
I kind of drew this already for you, but here's a normal spinal nerve where it comes
out of, this is just half of the neural foramen or inner vertebra foramen as the aka or IVF.
You can see this nerve coming out, splits into anterior and posterior ramus.
Everybody's happy.
There's the uncinate process.
Everybody looks good there.
There's superarticular process.
Nobody bothering that nerve, but in this patient, they developed arthritis of the joints of
onlusica or specifically of the uncinate process in this cartoon, and it crunched the nerve,
and now the nerve is all inflamed because of the irritation, and the patient has pain
going down the arm and maybe some, depending on what nerve it is, maybe some biceps power
loss or grip strength loss and burning pain and all sorts of radicular pain and radiculopathy,
even if there's positive neurological findings.
Okay.
Look at this case.
This is a case I just recently had.
So this is, now, I'm just going to modify this a little bit because it's a little more
complicated than this, but basically, let's look at from an A to P view.
This is a CT scan.
You can see Batman's ears really nice here.
Can you see him sticking up?
Right?
That looks like Batman.
There's uncinate processes here.
That one looks okay.
These look okay, but look what in the world has happened here.
So we have really bad bone spur formation coming out.
The neural foramen, of course, goes right through this region here, and the nerve runs
right through here, right?
So it's really close proximity to this thing, so this is no good.
If we, here's the cut line, those of you who've looked at my how to read your lumbar MRI video
know exactly what this is, but it shows an overhead view, really from the bottom up view.
That's why the sides are reversed.
But here's the, here's the uncinate process on this side.
So that would be right here.
You see the cut going through it, and then there's a black space.
There's the black space from the cut here.
Then it goes back to bone, and then bone, bone, bone, and then what in the world has happened
here?
That's all degenerative change, and look at the, look at the size.
Here's the neural foramen here, right?
It's huge.
It's massive.
The nerve would go right, go right through here, right?
No problem here.
What about the nerve trying to get through here?
It can't.
It's smashed, right?
It's smashed, and now it's all red and inflamed.
Yeah, no good, okay?
So these little bat man ears are really important in some patients.
Holes of the spine.
Let's check those out.
We talked about them a little, but let's really nail those down.
So there's two important protective holes.
Super important.
We have the vertebral foramen, which is that hole in the center.
Collectively, if you have a motion segment, you have two vertebral foramen make up the
vertebral canal.
Vertebral canal runs from the fremin magnum all the way down through your cervical spine,
all the way down thoracic, lumbar, sacrum.
So vertebral canal is important.
And then the neural foramen are how the spinal nerves, spinal nerve roots, get out of the
spine, which we'll look at as we go.
Let's start with the neural foramen.
Also called chiropractors tend to call these inner vertebral foramen, medical docs tend
to call them neural foramen.
Also an a.k.a. for inner vertebral foramen is IVF, not invertebral fetalization, fertilization.
That's a part of the reason I prefer neural foramen.
Anyway, they're all a.k.a.s.
They're created by these vertebral notches, which I showed you a superior vertebral notch,
but there's an inferior vertebral notch.
Together they come together and form a hole.
And what comes out of the hole, spinal nerve roots come out of the hole.
Basically the spinal nerve itself, and we'll get this technology, these divisions of the
spinal nerve roots are tricky and we'll look at that here in a second.
You got some arteries and veins that run through there as well.
This is, see I put a star here, very for all boards and for you patients or you lay people
as well.
You've got to understand what nerve comes out of what hole.
So the hole, first of all, how do you name the hole?
It's named by the two vertebral notches that create it.
It's as simple as that.
If the C5, the inferior, well I'll just show you, we'll show you here in a second.
The nerve root is the tricky one.
So the nerve root is named by the superior vertebral notch, names the nerve root.
In other words, the inferior member of the motion segment names it.
If you have a L4, L5, or a C4, C5 motion segment, what nerve comes out between C4 and C5?
C5 does.
In the lumbar spine, what nerve comes out between L4 and L5?
L4 does.
Same with the thoracic spine.
So there's a difference here.
Anytime there's weirdness boards, no matter what boards they like to test on that stuff.
So make sure you're familiar with that.
If you're trying to read the radiology report, you need to know that too.
So this is important for everybody to understand.
Let's look at an example.
It's probably the best way.
To see the neurophoramen of the cervical spine, we don't look straight, laterally, or from
a sagittal view like we do with the lumbar and thoracic.
We actually have to look obliquely anteriorly.
So we have to do an oblique type view.
This is an A to P view, but it's twisted a little bit laterally, and therefore it makes
the whole...
I could have actually rotated the skeleton a little further for you.
But nevertheless, we can see the neurophoramen right here.
How are these neurophoramen named?
C2 and C3?
This is the C2 slash 3 neurophoramen.
Some docs will just say that's the C2 foramen.
The bone above always names it, and that's true all the way down the spine.
But the nerves is where the problem comes in.
There's seven cervical vertebrae, there's actually eight cervical spinal nerves.
That's why everything is kind of yanked up one.
There's two.
C1 comes out here, C2 comes out here.
And that means C3 comes out here, C4 comes out here, C5 comes out here.
See how I'm naming them?
Who is this then?
Well, C5, C6 motion segment, the C6 spinal nerve is actually right here.
It comes out of that hole.
Everybody good with that?
All right, here's a view, lateral view, and you first quarter students who might be looking
at this.
This is a good way I test right here.
I could put a picture on your test and draw this right here and say, what nerve is this?
I'll give you C5 vertebra body.
This is the C5 vertebra.
What nerve is that?
That's the C6 exiting nerve root.
So what if I give you this picture?
I give you the C6 vertebrae, but I only give you the superior vertebral notch.
And I ask what nerve comes out of that, or maybe I'll be nice and draw a kind of Photoshop
in a nerve like I did here.
Well, the nerve is named by the inferior member of the motion segment.
C5 is not shown.
It would be up here.
C6 is here.
C5 disc would be here, right?
That's another important concept.
I mean, we have a disc hanging out right here, right?
Intervertebral disc.
Can't probably see it that good here.
So that would be the C5 disc.
The disc is named by the bone that sits on top of it.
So that's the C5 bone, right?
So that's the C6 nerve.
A disc herniation can pinch the C6 nerve.
It can't pinch the C5 nerve.
It's not like the lumbar spine.
You can't get lateral herniations here because of this wall, this unsanitary process.
Everybody good?
All right.
Everything I said about obliquely forward, don't have to repeat that again.
So what nerve root is this?
I'm going to get it.
Good.
C6 nerve root.
C6 exiting root.
C6 spinal nerve.
C6 spinal nerve roots here.
Right?
Why is it C6?
That's this.
What?
Okay.
What?
Let's do another quiz.
What hole is this?
Good.
You can just name it C3, C4, neuroframing, or you could call it the C3 neuroframing if
you want.
What disc is this?
Whoever sits on top of the disc conquers it.
So C3 is sitting on top of it.
That's the C3 disc.
We good?
All right.
We got to talk about a little basic neural anatomy here.
I'm not going to go crazy into this, but you got to know a little bit about the spinal
cord.
So the central nervous system, there's a peripheral nervous system and a central nervous system.
The CNS, the central nervous system, is made up by two parts.
The brain and the spinal cord.
Spinal cord has five parts that match the vertebra regions.
We have cervical vertebrae, we have a cervical spinal cord.
We have thoracic vertebrae, we have a thoracic spinal cord.
We have lumbar vertebrae, we have a lumbar spinal cord.
We have sacral vertebrae, we have a sacral part of the spinal cord, and we have a coccyx.
We have one coccygeal nerve as well.
The weird thing about this, though, how many are there?
That's always a good question.
Not big with numbers, medical students and chiropractic students, etc., 31 spinal nerves
you need to know, and there's eight of them here, which is the weird one.
There's only seven bones, but there's eight vertebrae, or eight spinal nerves.
All right.
Once again, the spinal cord and spinal nerves are protected, so I'm just showing you.
The spinal cord is protected by the vertebral canal.
That's the vertebral canal.
The spinal nerves, as they leave the spine, are protected by the neuroframen, aka neurovetebra
framen.
Some fun facts.
There's your 31 pairs of spinal nerves.
Here's the weird thing, though.
Notice the spinal cord stops right here about the level of L2, between L1 and L2, usually
the L1 disc, and normally.
Very strange, right?
During development, it just gets left behind, so we have a different setup.
The nerves and tracts are embedded in the spinal cord in a solid substance, and you'll
learn about that in neural anatomy.
I'm not going into that.
What about down here?
You still have organs in your pelvis and your legs.
How does that work?
These nerves just hang in a sack.
You have a ... I don't think I said this, but the framen magnum is the hole that comes
out of the skull.
Framen magnum is here.
You have a sack that goes all the way down, all the way down here to S2.
That's called the fecal sack, TH, fecal sack.
I don't want to do too much drawing, because my finger drawing is not great.
Thecal sack, or it's also called the dural sack.
This is filled with cerebral spinal fluids and baves and gives nutrients to all this
neural tissue.
It's super important.
The weird point is, in the part it's hard for students to understand, the spinal cord
is done here.
Up here ... let's go up here.
Let's say you're ... let's do with your eighth cervical nerve right here.
Your eighth cervical nerve is going to come out of the C7 neural framen, and it goes ... the
cord level itself, where the nerves go into and out of the cord, is right at the same
level.
But L5 ... we'll use L5.
The L5 spinal cord level is way up here.
It's about right here, about at the level of L1.
That's the spinal cord level, but it just has these super long nerve roots.
The IVF for it, the hole where the nerve comes out, is way down here between L5 and S1.
That's a weird setup with the spinal cord.
Why the committee didn't make this longer is beyond me.
No one knows for sure.
This end region is called the conus medullaris, down where the sacral and coccygeal spinal
cord levels are, conus medullaris.
We've got to conquer this spinal nerve thing and spinal nerve root, dorsal root ganglia.
What is the difference between all this stuff?
Every spinal cord level, even if it's L5, the spinal cord has a region where nerves
enter it.
That's called the spinal cord level.
This would be the C6 level.
This would be the C5 level that is unsheathed.
We have duramodder, which is ... we have three meninges, the duramodder, the arachnoid modder
stuck together.
The pia modder is actually around that white thing right there, is pia modder.
But at each cord level, we have these ... it looks like a tree, right?
These looks like roots coming out of the ground.
The ground would be the spinal cord.
These are called the nerve rootlets.
They give rise to a spinal nerve root, or spinal nerve root.
Sometimes you just call this the nerve root.
Same thing here.
Two types of these things.
Where you see this little bump right here, that gives a way that these are all sensory
nerves here.
We also know because this is the dorsal region, the back, and this is the anterior region
in the front.
These are where your sensory nerves are headed into the spinal cord and go up to the brain.
They enter the spinal cord.
I won't go into further than that.
These guys are all motor nerves.
They're coming out of the brain.
They're commands.
The brain made a command and it's going to, let's say, to twitch your little move your
index finger.
It's headed that way.
These rootlets convert into roots.
The nerve roots merge again after this bump, which is called the dorsal root ganglia.
This is where the nerve cell bodies of all your sensory nerves live.
It's really important, really delicate.
Not good to get a herniation touching that thing.
Notice how these spinal nerve roots come together.
The motor and sensory come together right after the dorsal root ganglia and right about here.
That is your official spinal nerve.
People use that term to talk about the nerve rootlets, they'll say spinal nerve.
To talk about the spinal nerve root, they just mix all these terms together.
It shouldn't really do that.
These are the nerve rootlets.
These are the spinal nerve roots, sometimes just called the root or the motor root, sensory
root.
That means that these little rootlets have come together.
Where they both merge, that is the official spinal nerve.
What's the board question about a spinal nerve?
Probably on every board there ever is.
This is a mixed nerve.
We got incoming signals, sensory signals.
Let's say you touch something with your finger, it was hot, the message is going to the brain.
We got outgoing messages, so it's called the mixed nerve, the spinal nerve is.
Are we good with that?
We also have some gray ramus communicons coming in here.
We're not going to talk about those in this video, but it's a little more, there's some
sympathetic flow coming in here as well, but we're not going to talk about that in this
video.
Okay, everybody good with that?
We know what nerve roots are.
We know what these spinal nerve roots are, or just dorsal motor roots are.
We know what the dorsal root ganglia.
We know that this is the spinal nerve.
Here's the inner vertebral foramen.
The inner vertebral foramen is usually right here, because the dorsal ganglia usually
lives in the inner vertebral foramen or neural foramen.
The first thing that pops out, that's the spinal nerve.
Are we good?
Play it back.
This is very important stuff.
Everything I just said is kind of laid out for you.
We have a sensory root.
You could call it a sensory spinal root as well, or a sensory spinal nerve.
You can say spinal nerve, but say something in front of it, sensory spinal nerve, or you
could say afferent spinal nerve, the same as sensory.
Afferent means the signals are going in.
Spinal nerve is already out and it's a mixed nerve.
These guys are not mixed nerves.
These only have incoming signals.
This motor root only has outgoing signals.
Are we good?
Do we understand that?
Awesome.
Okay, kind of gross for some of you, but this is an overhead view of a slice through the
C6 level.
The front would be up here.
The back would be back here.
This is C6, therefore, this is the C6 spinal cord itself.
You can see the gray motor, the H shape in the middle, I won't get into that, and the
white motor around the outside.
I'm sorry, matter.
There's a difference between motor, dura motor.
That's the protection.
We can actually see dura motor would be right here around the outside.
Let me change that color.
Dura motor's here.
Rachnoid would be stuck to the inside of the dura motor.
Those two are really tough, stuck together.
This is all the subdural space here, or the interdural space, or inter-thecal space.
Epidural space would be out in this region.
There's epidural space here, and there's our roots.
There's our ventral root, C6.
There's our dorsal root, or motor root, or I'm sorry.
That's our ventral motor root.
There's our dorsal sensory root back here.
Dorsal ganglion, we can't really see.
They left the fat.
See, that's all packed.
There's the inner vertebrae.
Framon's all packed with fat there.
Here's our z-joint, though.
Here's our facet joint right here.
You can see this one better.
Who makes the zegapathosio joint?
This is the superior articular process.
This is the inferior articular process.
This is all lamina right here.
This is lamina as well.
All right, awesome.
And again, another for you primary health care students, got to know this picture.
That's good for my coaching clients to know this as well.
So here we go.
So this is the disc would be right in here.
So let's look at some of these parts.
There's the spinal cord again.
We have the H-shaped gray matter here.
That's the white matter.
All the myelinated tracts, remember I said there's no nerve roots.
They're all embedded in this stuff.
So this is the C6 level.
So these are all C6 nerve rootlets here.
These are in the front.
So these are the motor.
They're headed this way.
These are the backs of the signals going that way.
Okay, awesome.
So now this would be the sensory nerve root, number 18.
Actually the nerve rootlets have come together to form the sensory nerve root.
And if you keep going, there is the dorsal root ganglia.
Okay, great.
We have dura mater is in light gray, arachnoid mater is in a darker gray.
You can follow those and see that the dura mater and the arachnoid mater actually follow
the spinal nerve out.
And they morph into the nerve root coverings that you've learned.
The epineurium and the, there's an endoneurium where you can't see.
The perineurium would arise from the arachnoid layer.
The epineurium would arise probably right about here.
Those would morph into those tissues.
I won't get into that any more than that.
But yeah, so everything we've just talked about.
But now let's go a little further.
Here is the spinal nerve, which is a mixed nerve.
Everything's mixed up from now on, but the spinal nerve is very short lived.
It splits into two pieces very quickly.
This big thick piece is called the ventral or the anterior ramus.
So that's the anterior ramus.
This split is the posterior ramus.
Some call them anterior primary ramus.
I don't, I go with Gray's Anatomy, but there's a little controversy on what to call these.
So be careful.
Check with your teacher to see what they're calling them.
I'm calling them like Gray's Anatomy and like snows, neural anatomy.
I really like snows.
They both call these just simply the anterior ramus, posterior ramus.
Posterior ramus are important.
That's going to split into two branches, a medial branch.
So that's the medial branch of the posterior ramus.
That one's going to give life to the facet joint here.
People with chronic facet joint pain, the pain is transmitted down the medial branch.
There's medial branch blocks that you've probably heard me talk about.
There's a post, or there's a lateral ramus right here.
Oh, by the way, this goes up a branch I didn't draw it, but this goes out and supplies the
multifidae muscle above.
That's just a little patch of the multifidae muscle.
This is the lateral branch here.
Some people have an intermediate branch as well, which I didn't draw in here.
We have a gray ramus communicantes coming in.
There's the sympathetic chain.
I'm not going to go down that road.
You can let your gross anatomy teachers talk to you about that.
But this is a brachial plexus, right?
If this is C6, this is going to be the second root of the brachial plexus that you guys
are going to study.
I think we got everything, everybody good with that?
Super important slide.
Just another important slide you can look at while I take a sip of water.
Sorry, I'm not going to have time to edit this out of here.
It shows the vertebral arteries quite nicely.
Notice there's two, sometimes three vertebral veins that run along with those.
This is the epidural venous plexus.
This is also called the epidural space.
When you go to the doctor of sciatica or radicular pain, they can do an epidural.
This is the epidural space that they're talking about right here.
This is the inter-thecal space because our inter-dural space.
There's the dura mater right here.
They don't really show the arachnoid mater stuck to this.
Pia mater would be right here surrounding the spinal cord and the nerve roots themselves.
Notice that if this is the C5 bone, this is the C6 disc.
Oncinate process is sticking up here.
I think that's about all we need to say there.
Vertebral frame and vertebral canal was still talking about those.
I just wanted to throw this slide in here too.
I didn't really say.
How was the vertebra?
This could have been the first slide of the whole series.
A vertebra is formed by two parts.
There's a vertebral body and there's a vertebral arch.
We need to talk about this vertebral arch.
The vertebral canal is inside the vertebral arch.
Let's look at it.
Vertebral arch is this.
It's the pedicle.
The articular pillar is this thing.
The lamina.
Some authors include the root of the spinous process and then the structures repeat on
that side.
The vertebral arch is not the transverse processes.
It is not the spinous processes.
Good with that?
It's as simple as that.
Everything I just said, the parts.
The vertebral canal here, sometimes you'll hear radiologists or neurosurgeons or orthopedic
spine surgeons.
They'll talk about the roof.
I'm going to free up the roof of the lamina.
I'm going to do a laminal plasty and break open the roof of the neuroframing or vertebra
framing.
What is the roof of the vertebra framing?
They just mean this thing.
They mean the lamina-spinous process and other lamina.
That's called the roof right here.
Not the articular pillar, not the pedicle here, but just the lamina-spinous process.
The floor of the vertebra framing is the vertebral body back here and the disc, which
we can't see.
That forms the floor.
Good with that?
All right, now we're going to get into some crazy stuff.
I might even stop the video right now and take a break and come back for atlas and axis.
All right, atlas and axis, here we go, some strange bones.
They're very unique to the cervical spine.
C1, C2 are called atlas and axis.
Top two bones.
One thing right off the bat that is weird, they don't have any of Batman ears.
They have no lusca joints.
So let's take a look at atlas first.
It's atlas, of course, held up the world, Greek mythology.
That's where it got its name.
So it supports the skull, it connects the skull, specifically the region of the skull
it connects to is called the occiput or the occipital region.
It has no vertebral body.
That's right, no vertebral body has no unsonate processes.
It has a posterior and anterior arch, which is different.
We've seen a vertebral arch.
Really the posterior arch is just the vertebral arch, but we call it posterior to keep it
separate.
Off the posterior and anterior arch, there's little bumps for attachments of ligaments
and such.
Those are called the anterior posterior tubercles.
Some just a side note about chiropractors, an old school chiropractic belief philosophies.
This is the most powerful bone, according to them.
They manipulate and micro manipulate this bone and treat all sorts of diseases with
this bone.
So not a whole heck of a lot of good research behind that philosophy, I could add.
But nevertheless, it's been around for over a hundred years, so there might be something
to it that we just can't explain.
Just a little side note there.
The atlas provides a platform for which the skull attaches and then together the skull
and the atlas can rotate around the axis.
Here's all the parts.
So now if you lay people, unless you've had a fracture we're going to be talking about
a fracture or you have some upper cervical problems, you probably don't have to worry
about all these parts, but you primary health care docs or student docs, you need to know
all these nooks and crannies.
So we have an anterior arch here, which we don't have anywhere else in the spine, so
the only place it has an anterior arch, it's got a bump coming off the front that's called
the anterior tubercle.
It's got a transverse process just like everything else.
It still has a Framon transversarium, aka transverse Framons, watch those backwards
Latin flavored AKAs for those.
There's the facet of the superior ticular process.
Really I don't think in a bone there's really a facet there.
I think that cartilage has probably been washed away, but nevertheless you could call it that.
In fact, for my gross one spinal anatomy class, that's what you will call it.
That is a member of the Atlantic occipital joint.
The lateral mass of atlas, we'll see better from the A to P view is right here.
There's the posterior arch of atlas.
There's the posterior tubercle of atlas.
We'll talk about this weird thing.
There's bone growth right there.
What in the heck is that?
Don't see it on this side, do you?
No, but there's a groove for the part three of the vertebra artery that passes through
here and vein and a nerve that passes through there, but that's the weird thing here.
It's called the posterior ponticle and we'll look at that pretty quick.
If we do an anterior A to P view of the atlas, here's what we have.
We have, there's our anterior arch right here, our tubercle.
There's no body.
Instead of a body, we have these two blocks of bones, which are really nothing more than
our ticular pillars, but these are called lateral mass, the lateral mass of atlas.
That's a special name given to them.
We still have a superior ticular process, inferior ticular process underneath, which
you can't see.
There's transverse framing out here.
Post your arches back here.
The neural frame and would be right here.
That's part of the neural canal or the vertebral canal vertebral frame.
Did I say neural?
I must be getting tired.
I should have taken a break.
Like I said, it was, but this is the vertebral canal.
The lantooccipital and lantoaxial joints, when naming these joints, atlas is always
named first out of respect and atlas, the name for it is atlanto.
So the connection between the occipit and atlas is the atlantooccipital joint.
No rotation, no significant rotation occurs there.
The connection between atlas and axis is called the atlantoaxial joint.
That's where all the rotation of the head occurs at that joint.
They're both true diarthrodial joints.
They have a capsule, they have articular cartilage, you have synovial tissue in there.
They secrete filled with synovial fluid, just like the joint of your knee.
They're a true diarthrodial joint.
If we cut the back off, so this is a PA view and we've cut the posterior arch of atlas
off and we've cut the lamina off of C2 as well right here.
So we can see what's going on and we've stripped away some ligaments.
We actually see the cruciform ligaments.
We'll talk about those more in a minute.
There's the facet joint capsules.
If you take off the facet joint capsules, you've got the atlantoaxial joints, lantoaccipital
joints right there.
This is where the rotation occurs right there.
Here's a CT.
CT is cool because you can put a slice right through whatever you want to look at.
Here's a slice right through C2.
There's the dens we'll look at.
Here's the lateral mass of atlas.
Lateral mass of atlas.
There's the occipital condyles, but there's the atlantoaccipital joint and the atlantoaxial
joint is right there.
Here's a real bone specimens and there they are.
There's atlas, transverse process, transverse framing.
There's that groove for the vertebra artery here, posterior tubercle, posterior arch.
There's that weird thing again.
What the heck is that?
You don't see it here.
What is that?
I'll tell you what that is.
That's the posterior, what is that?
That is the posterior atlantoaccipital membrane.
For whatever reason, it likes to calcify in this region and kind of morph into the posterior
arch.
That's called the posterior ponticle.
It creates a new hole.
We don't have a hole here.
We have a hole here that's called the arcuate framing.
That's called ... I think I have slides on that.
Another important thing though, so we're looking at atlas sitting on axis, spinal cord.
Spinal cord would be the super delicate spinal cord would be coming right through this hole
here.
Very delicate.
Standing compression.
What's to stop this bone from sliding forward and this ... Let's change colors.
This from jamming into the spinal cord and paralyzing you.
That's a problem, right?
Luckily, we have a super strong ligament called the transverse ligament of atlas.
Next to these bumps right here, calicula atlantos, the name for those bumps, and it lasses the
back of this.
Therefore, if you push this forward, this will not let it go forward.
It'll stop.
It's a very strong ligament.
There's another ligament over the top.
Remember the transverse ligament atlas is just part of the cruciform ligament.
Good.
What else did I want to show you?
Oh, let's talk about ... Let's talk about the vertebra artery.
Now, you guys don't, you lay people don't need to know this, but V2 is coming from ... There's
transverse framing of C3.
Right when the artery comes out of C2, it changes names.
It's called V3 of this part, V3 of the vertebra artery.
It does a little kink here.
It goes up through the transverse framing of one, and it does this wicked bend.
See how it bends like that to go in the groove underneath here for the vertebra artery?
Then it rips through Duramatter and becomes V4, and then it goes up here to go to the
base.
It goes up higher, but it goes up here, and then it hooks up with a form that's called
the basilar artery from the other side coming across.
Yeah, that's the vertebra artery.
The thing with chiropractors and strokes, a lot of times the problem happens right here.
A lot of those patients, I don't know what the prevalence is, but if you have atherosclerotic
plaque built up, you have high cholesterol, and you have plaque built up in here, and
you get a chiropractic manipulation, you could break that plaque loose and send it
up river here, or send it downstream, and it can go up in the brain and cause a stroke.
It's not just chiropractic manipulation, the osteopathic manipulation.
People who work overhead, putting in a ceiling fan, people painting on the ceiling, electricians,
all are at risk.
Any type of extension rotation, lateral flexion of the spine can break these little bombs
loose, and it doesn't happen.
Pretty darn rare, right?
Chiropractic is pretty darn safe, but there are problems with, don't get me started too
much on this, then they should chiropractors, in fact, by law and on California, you have
to explain this risk of stroke to patients having a chiropractic manipulation.
It's pretty darn small, but nevertheless it is there, so sorry, digressing.
All right, there's that ligament, I just drew a transverse ligament of atlas.
All right, let's look at axis.
This is the second cervical vertebrae, connects with C3 normally.
It's got two normal zegapothal seal joints come together and connect.
The top is weird though, the top one is flat, looks like a helicopter landing pad.
That's part of the Atlanto axial joint, so it is a little weird, and it's super weird
because it has this weird pole coming out of it we've looked at already.
That's called the dens or the odontoid process, you guys gotta memorize that, especially if
I'm consulting with you and you've had a dens, odontoid fracture, or Jefferson fracture,
or something, you should know this anatomy if you have problems up high.
But the axis is where the rotation occurs, I always put that on my test and it's always
surprised how many students get that wrong.
The rotation of the head is not caused by axis.
The actual rotation occurs between axis and atlas, as we've said before, between the Atlanto
axial joint.
It's not, the rotation doesn't occur between the Atlanto occipital joint.
There's a back view of that weird pole, it's pretty strange.
Embryologically speaking, this was supposed to be the body of atlas, it kind of stole
it from it.
I guess you can kind of think, it's a little more to it than that, but you kind of think
of it as that.
It does have a very thick vertebral body, has nice thick pedicles here, has a lamina,
bipid spinous process, transverse processes here, and then it's got these helicopter
landing pads, right, superarticular facets.
And then the dense has a gigantic, see that?
See this big circle here?
That's a pad of articular cartilage, there's a real, kind of a synovial joint right here.
Yeah, synovial joint, and that's for that, the transverse ligament of atlas, remember
how that came across it, like that, to hold it in place.
Good.
All right, let's go through these ligaments, like we looked at these already, so here's
the normal ligaments of the spine we've already talked about in other videos.
There are some different ones, so we've already talked about a little bit how C1 and C2, they
have to be held firmly together, so you don't want any forward slip, no AP sagittal translation
you don't want, you'll be paralyzed if that happens, if a huge amount of it happens.
You don't want side to side slip or lateral slip, that's called horizontal translation,
look at my biomechanical spine video if you don't understand that.
And let's look at the players here.
We kind of looked at this, now I took ligament of nuke, would be right here in the middle,
I got rid of that one, so we could see a little bit better.
So ligamentum flavum stops between C1 and C2, and then instead of, I mean this really
is ligamentum flavum, it's quite thin, it's quite broad now, so they gave it a new name,
they're calling it the posterior Atlanta occipital membrane, right, you can still see the facet
capsule, but notice this ligament, the V3 as I drove before, it actually pierces a hole
through there so it can jump into its groove for the vertebra artery in here, right, so
remember this calcifies in some people as a posterior ponticle, we'll look at that
in a minute, oh here it is right here, ossification, the posterior Atlanta occipital membrane,
so as I've already explained, you can get a new hole by that calcify and that's called
the arcuate foramen, and that sheet of bone over the top is called the posterior ponticle,
it's very common in some, on average it's 33% of all humans have, one of these at least,
you can have them on both sides or on one side, who cares about it, it's usually considered
asymptomatic, just kind of an incidental finding, there's no contraindication with manipulation
these days, however there is a little bit of research out there that, because V3 of
the vertebra frame and pierces it, there has been some research that people with migraine
headaches, especially the type of migraine headache that has an aura that comes on before
it, they're at risk, they tend to have a posterior ponticle, and then there's some scattered
research about the increased risk of stroke, because you got not much wiggle room for that
artery, right, if it's encased in bone via the arcuate foramen, so that's pretty much
been disproven, but yet, I mean you just get, if you have those things bilaterally, personally
myself, I wouldn't let anybody do cervical manipulation to myself, I'm super conservative
with that, that's just my opinion, so here is the bone, turning to bone, there's the
posterior atlantooccipital membrane, and for whatever weird reason this turned to bone,
and formed a nice posterior ponticle there, and created an arcuate foramen, now is the
tunnel which we can't see, okay we're good with that, talked about that, there that is
again, so on an x-ray, if you have them bilaterally, they're very easy to see, so here's a lateral
sagittal x-ray, radiograph, den's would be right there, it's kind of hard to see, there's
the anterior tubercle of atlas right there, again I have an x-ray, how to read x-ray of
the cervical spine, you should check that out if you need that, and then we have the
posterior ponticle right there, and that would be the students, arcuate foramen, great, can't
see any of the ligaments right, x-ray and ct burn right through those ligaments, alright,
now if we scrape all that stuff away and go into the middle layer, we can see spinal cord
has been removed, we can see the posterior longitudinal ligament, I think we covered
this already, there's the tectoral membrane, goes all the way up to the foramen magnum
here, just an extension of the posterior longitudinal ligament, we've already talked
about the cruciform ligaments, how important they are, even drew transverse ligament for
you, but there it is, the transverse ligament of atlas is a part, a member of the cruciform
ligaments, cruciform ligaments include some superior longitudinal fibers or band that
runs up to the clivus, past the foramen magnum, and it runs, we have some inferior fibers
as well, as well that run down, we have some other stabilizing ligaments here, those are
part of the tectoral membrane, they're a thickening and deep part of it, they're given, they're
given its own name, accessory atlantoaxial ligament it's called, and the auler ligaments,
I'm not going to go any further, if we remove the cruciform ligaments, there's an apical
ligament that hides right behind this, and then we have two auler ligaments that go
from the tip of the dens and anchor into the foramen magnum here, so more stabilization,
but of all these ligaments, the main one is the transverse ligament of atlas.
Alright, now we got to talk about the cervical and vertebral disc, because a lot of people
that I consult, well they have disc herniations, so what do we know about the cervical and
vertebral disc, well it's very similar to the other discs, the lumbar discs, they have
tons of videos on those, talked a lot about that before, but they can succumb to those
same pathological conditions as the lumbar can, right, so they're a little bit tougher,
some research shows, when a disc herniation occurs it tends to not reabsorb by the body
well, because it has more annulus fibrosis in it than anything else, but let's look
if you don't know, let's tell you what the disc, here's a generic disc, but this holds
for the cervical as well, it's got a nucleus papulsus in the center, and it's corralled
by these belts of collagen, like patients I, or lay people I say it's like a steel belted
radial tire, you have air in the center, but it's not air, it's like a toothpaste consistency,
and the air has to be held in place so it doesn't escape, and there's the steel belted
radial, you got, what is it, 14, 16 belts of these steel belts, but they're not steel,
they're made up of type one collagen, which is really quite strange, that's also the design
is really, the committee did a great job in a way designing this thing, but I'll show
you some problems with the design too, if you drop a line straight down a vertical line,
let's drop it right down here, and then you measure these, each one of these black things
is a belt, there's a sheet of type one collagen, so there's many sheets in each lamellae, they
run negative 65 degrees from vertical, the next layer which I can't show you here, but
if I scrape this away, like this I can show you right here, so negative 65 degrees, the
next layer deep to that runs positive 65 degrees, so it's a great strong design to keep this
nucleus from squeezing out, but we got a problem with it, the nucleus is 80% water, the cells
make proteoglycans which absorb water like crazy, I've talked about that in other videos,
here's kind of cool image showing the, you could pull these sheets, these sheets are
called lamellae, so there's actually 15 and average belts of type one collagen called
lamellae with their fibers running 60 degrees from vertical and they alternate, but here's
the committee problem, we don't know why this is, but research has shown most disc herniations
occur back in these posterior lateral corners, right by the nerve roots, so people get pain
down their arm or leg depending on what happens, these lamellae are incomplete there, they don't
completely encircle the disc, in the front they completely encircle the disc, therefore
you don't see that many anterior disc herniations or lateral disc herniations, but in these
back corners they kind of peter out, and that's not good, like right in these corners they
don't come together like they're supposed to, and that leaves a weak spot, this nuclear
material can squirt out and create a tear through there, so that's not a good thing.
The other thing, the research shows that they're actually thicker in the front and thinner
in the back, so that's not a good thing, we want to protect the, I mean the nerve roots
would be hanging out, I mean the, well let's see that's terrible, but nerve root would
be coming like this, let me start that over, goodness sakes, shoulda took that break, nerve
root would be coming out something like this on each side, but then you also have traversing
roots which would be going down, coming out down here below, so the back of the disc
where it's the weakest and incomplete is right in this kind of danger zone if you will, so
that's not a good place to be weak and incomplete, so herniations can occur right in this region,
we'll look at herniation here in a second, just an overhead view again showing the disc,
nucleus, in reality the nucleus there's like this kind of transitional area where it's
kind of semi nucleus and semi annulus fibrosis, cervical disc pathology, so a disc can rip,
we'll look at this here in a second and create discogenic pain from an annular tear, the
annular tear can progress into a herniation where the disc material squeezes out the back
and compresses those nerves, I just draw, I just drew, and that can cause pain down the
arms, that's called radicular pain, it's not called radiculopathy, radiculopathy is a neurological
finding, you've tested reflexes and muscles, you've found that there's some kind of
you found a loss of reflexes, a loss of muscle strength, you make the diagnosis of radiculopathy,
the pain that radiates the adjective is radicular pain, one of my pet peeves, right, you can
also have problems with ligamentum flavin, we'll look, did we look at that, I think we
did look at that, bulging and compressing those neural structures resulting in radicular
pain or central stenosis, you can have myelopathy, neurogenic claudication and things like that,
so here's a little cartoon I whipped up, there's a young healthy looking disc, there's the
nucleus annulus, remember the lamellae which I didn't draw in are weak here in these corners,
right, so you don't want a herniation coming right here, right, because that's where the
delicate nerve roots are, the rootlets in the sensory and the motor nerve roots are
right in this region, dorsal gangl is fairly well protected because of the unsonate processes,
but this region is not, so what's the first thing that happens in the birth of an annular
tear and herniation, I could have entitled this, first thing is you get a degenerative
disease, maybe you have a scoliosis, maybe you have weak muscles, maybe you're in a
car crash and your ligaments are loose now, now your biomechanics are screwed up and you've
got degenerative disease of the disc, it gets weak, dried out and brittle, cells have died
and they don't make protoglycans anymore, so what happens next, now you've got yourself,
let's say you've gotten a little fender bender in the parking lot, something minor and you
ripped your disc open, that can be super painful and necessitate an ACDF fusion or some other
type of procedure, people can have these without any pain, it's all, I didn't draw this in,
but it's all about these little guys, in the back of the disc, remember from my other videos,
you have sign of vertebral nerves, just in the outer portion here, if you get this degenerated
stuff and it starts to cause an inflammation in here, possibly because the cells in here
were developed after the formation of the nervous system, I won't get into that now,
but it's weird because when you're born, you're born with notochordal like cells, but they
morph into more fibroblasts like cells by the time you're about 10, one theory is the
body doesn't know who they are and if you get a rip out here where the nerves are, the
blood vessels are also out here, the disc is a vascular, you know from my lumbar videos,
but if this degenerated gunk gets in here filled with cytokines like tumor necrosis
factor alpha, you can get a wicked inflammation here and that's called discogenic pain, some
it doesn't, it seems to be rare, but some people can even leak, these tears can leak
and it can cause a chemical radiculopathy by causing an inflammation inside these nerve
roots here, so that can happen as well, but that's called a full thickness annular tear,
gotta get a drink of water and that may or may not be a source of pain, it all depends
of inflammation that's occurred down, what it can do though, now you like your, if you
have a big degenerative chunk of nucleus propulsus, you can deliver that like delivering
a baby and that's what happens next, this is a disc herniation where the nucleus propulsus
is pushed out and yeah, you got yourself a herniation, compressing the nerve rootlets
and the motor nerve root here, not the dorsal, but yeah, if that gets inflamed, the patient
patients got horrible pain, going down the arm, I guess this would be, I mean usually
that would be the right arm, these sides are usually reversed, but yeah, they'd be miserable
and if it's bad enough, they might have motor loss and reflex loss and they might have real
radiculopathy, alright, last thing I just want to mention is the C7 vertebrae because
I have in my practice seen these things, C7 is not quite as strange, it has that long
biped spinous process called the vertebra promenans, but another weird thing about C7,
it's got a hole for the vertebra artery, but in most people the vertebra artery doesn't
go through the hole, that's really weird, but the vertebra veins do go through the hole,
so very strange, vertebra artery usually goes in the transverse frame of C6, so very
weird, 75% of the time this is the longest bone, the one that sticks out the furthest,
about 15% of the time it's T1, 6% or 10% of the time it's C6, that's not why I'm putting
this in here, these darn cervical ribs are hypertrophic transverse processes, you're
going to run into these when you get out in the field, so you need to know something about
these, so if the transverse processes extend further out more laterally than those of T1,
you got yourself something called hypertrophic transverse processes, even weirder, sometimes
you can grow a rib off the transverse processes, really weird, called cervical rib, I guess
I should have talked more about the thoracic outlet, but these cervical ribs are hypertrophic
transverse processes, they can compress the inferior trunk of the brachial plexus, mainly
the C8 root, and you can get an ulnar neuropathy because of this, you can get pain burning
down your arm, you can lose some function in your hand, it can be quite pesky, it can
also compress the subclavian artery, and it could cause a blood clot, luckily the blood
clot won't go into the brain, it goes down toward the, get stuck in the hand or something,
sorry for the noise again, we did pretty good except it's getting a little noisy out there,
yeah so that's called thoracic outlet syndrome, so bottom line, cervical rib or hypertrophic
transverse processes can cause thoracic outlet syndrome, which is the worst darn name in
the world, thoracic outlet is down by your stomach, that's the thoracic inlet yet they
call it thoracic outlet, absolutely horrible anatomical term, been fighting with clinicians
for years to change it but it's never going to get changed, so we got a 37 year old electrician
comes into your office with neck pain, numbness, tingling, burning, in his right upper extremity,
especially when he works overhead, you take some radiographs, what do you think? As we listen,
I don't know if you guys can hear that or not, got some guy's sign or something out there,
sorry about that, well yeah this is not the guy right, this is normal, so here's T1,
there's the T1 transverse process here, T1 transverse process here, and then we have
pretty close to getting high, but there's transverse process of C7 is here and here,
and it's okay, okay but let's look at our patient now, here's our patient, oh my gosh that's like
ridiculous right, you can see that, so here's the C7 transverse process right here,
and he's got this little bump growing here, that's called a cervical rib, it's even worse on the other side,
right, so those are cervical ribs, how about this one, or there I pointed them out for you,
how about this guy, 62 year old comes in, trouble working overhead,
what's the problem, oh yeah look at these, yeah good you got them,
right, but this time there's no little bump, right, they're just, they're hypertrophic,
you have to know the difference between cervical rib and hypertrophic, they're very important,
so those are hypertrophic transverse process, they both do the same thing, the C8 or the
inferior trunk of the brachial plexus comes right out here, and so does the subclavian artery,
so you bend and you extend your head, I mean that could come down and crush those things,
so you get your hands fall asleep and there are all sorts of symptoms, I won't get into that now,
all right did we do it,
yeah we did, all right awesome, we made it through here, you are now an expert on the
cervical spine, if you know all this stuff, my students can be tested on this stuff, I don't
know if I'll make them watch this or not, but you're definitely ready to go into
the how to read your MRI now, now that you know all this anatomy, all right, so give me a thumbs
up if you like the video, subscribe to the channel, we'll see you in the next one.
The spinal column or backbone is one of the most important parts of your body.
It provides the main support, allowing you to stand upright, bend, and twist.
33 individual bones interlock with each other to form the spinal column.
The vertebrae are numbered and divided into regions.
T1-C7 cervical vertebrae form your neck, support your head and neck, and allow you to nod and shake your head.
T1-T12 thoracic, that's the 12 vertebrae that are joined by ribs to form your rib cage.
L1-L5 lumbar, your 5 sturdy lumbar vertebrae carry most of the weight of your upper body
and provide a stable center of gravity when you move.
5 vertebrae of the sacrum and 4 of the coccyx are fused, it makes up the back wall of your pelvis.
Between each of the movable vertebrae is located the intervertebral disc.
Intervertebral discs consist of a thick outer layer with a criss-crossing fibrous structure,
annulus, that surrounds the soft gel-like center, the nucleus.
Discs function like shock-absorbing springs.
The annulus pulls the vertebral bodies together against the elastic resistance of the gel-filled nucleus.
When you bend, the nucleus acts like a ball bearing, allowing the vertebral bodies to roll over the incompressible gel.
Each disc works in concert with two facet joints, forming a spinal motion segment.
The biomechanical function of each pair of facet joints is to guide and limit the movement of the spinal motion segment.
The surfaces of the joint are coated with cartilage that helps each joint move smoothly.
Directly behind the discs, the ring-like vertebral bodies create a vertical tunnel called the spinal canal or neural canal.
The spinal cord and spinal nerves pass through the spinal canal, which protects them from injury.
The spinal cord is the major column of nerve tissue that is connected to the brain and serves as an information superhighway between the brain and the body.
The nerves in your spinal cord branch off to form pairs of nerve roots that travel through the small openings between your vertebrae.
Enter vertebral foramines.
First, a thin guide wire is placed under X-ray control down to the involved level on one
side of the midline spine.
A tapered dilator, smaller than a pencil, is inserted over the guide wire.
A small tube is inserted over the dilator to create a portal down to the vertebra.
The endoscope is placed through the tube and the low end of the laminate are identified.
With this close-up operative view, your surgeon can then micro-surgically remove the small
area of the lamina bone.
This process is called a laminotomy.
Then the part of abnormal thickened ligamentum flavum can also be removed.
All this frees space for the nerve and spinal cord and relieves compression, thereby eliminating
the symptoms of stenosis.
The same procedure can then be performed on the opposite side.
The incisions are closed with a stitch or two and the procedure is complete.
The spinal cord is a very important part of our central nervous system, the overall system
that controls and coordinates the activities of our bodies.
Our brain is surrounded by the skull, while our spinal cord is surrounded by rings of
bone called vertebrae, and both are covered by a protective membrane.
Together, the vertebrae and membrane make up our spinal column, or our backbones.
The backbone, which protects our spinal cord, starts at the base of our skull and ends just above our hips.
The spinal cord is about 18 inches long and extends from the base of the brain down the middle of the back
to just below the last rib in the waist area.
The main job of the spinal cord is to be the communication system between the brain and the body
by carrying messages that allow us to move and feel sensation.
Our spinal nerve cells, called neurons, carry the messages to and from the spinal cord.
These messages leave the spinal cord through openings in the vertebrae.
Spinal nerve roots branch off the spinal cord in pairs, one going to each side of the body.
Each nerve has a specific job for movement and feeling.
You can tell the muscles in your arms, hands, fingers, legs, toes, chest, and other parts of your body when and how to move.
When a spinal cord injury occurs, sensation and movement may be interrupted, resulting in a temporary or permanent loss of function and paralysis.
In general, the higher on the spinal cord the injury occurs, the greater loss of function the person may experience.
The vertebrae are grouped into sections according to their location.
For example, the seven vertebrae in the neck are called the cervical vertebrae.
The vertebrae are numbered top to bottom from the head to the tailbone.
The top vertebrae is called C1, the next is C2, C3, and so on.
Cervical spinal cord injuries usually cause loss of function in the arms and legs, resulting in tetraplegia, which is also called quadriplegia.
The next 12 vertebrae are called the thoracic vertebrae.
The first T1 is where the top rib attaches.
Injuries in the thoracic region usually affect the trunk and legs and result in paraplegia.
The lumbar vertebrae are the five vertebrae in the lower back between the thoracic vertebrae, where the ribs attach, and the pelvis, or hip bone.
The sacral vertebrae run from the pelvis to the end of the spinal column.
Injuries to the five lumbar vertebrae, L1 through L5, and similarly to the five sacral vertebrae, S1 through S5, generally result in some loss of functioning in the hips and legs.
Whether the cause of a spinal injury or illness is traumatic or non-traumatic, the damage affects the nerve fibers passing through the injured area.
That can damage or weaken part or all of the corresponding muscles and nerves below the injury site.
Doctors have already or will assign your loved one a level of injury that corresponds to the damage below the injury.
In chapter 5, we'll explain more about these injury levels and how they can impact you or your loved one.
Right now, we'll move on to chapter 3 to inform you about some things that may occur soon after the immediate spinal cord injury or illness.
Scoliosis is an abnormal curvature of the spine that, if left untreated, can lead to
medical complications.
In order to understand scoliosis better, let's first take a look at a healthy spine.
Small bones called vertebrae align in a series to compose the spine.
Ligaments and muscles connected to the spine provide stability while allowing movement.
A healthy spine has natural front to back curves.
The curve in the neck area is called the cervical spine.
The second curve forms a thoracic spine located in the upper back, and the third curve forms
the lumbar spine located in the lower back.
A healthy spine appears straight from a front or back view.
Scoliosis causes an abnormal side-to-side curve of the spine.
This affects the structure and posture of the rest of the body.
One hip or one shoulder may appear higher than the other.
The shoulder blades may stick out, and the body may lean to one side.
Scoliosis is a progressive condition, meaning that it can get worse over time.
If left untreated, a severe curvature can form, causing the vertebrae to rotate and
move even further out of position.
This can make it difficult to breathe or cause pressure on the spinal cord and nerves, causing
pain and fatigue.
So what causes scoliosis?
Some people are born with malformed vertebrae, unequal leg lengths, or fused ribs that cause
congenital, meaning born with, scoliosis.
Other conditions such as cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, spina bifida, and polio can also
lead to scoliosis.
In adults, scoliosis may develop because of degenerative changes in the spine, including
osteoporosis, a bone weakening disease, and arthritis.
In most cases, the cause of scoliosis is unknown, and this is termed idiopathic scoliosis.
And spine curvature usually do not require treatment, but are monitored.
Back bracing may be used to treat curvatures that are more significant for children that
are still growing.
Back braces use pressure to strengthen the spine.
Physical therapy can help to strengthen the back and improve balance while sitting, standing,
and walking.
Occupational therapy can help improve independence with daily activities, such as dressing.
Scoliosis can custom-order seating systems that provide support and help maintain posture.
Surgery is usually required for spine curvature that are significant because of the high risk
of medical complications.
Spinal fusion surgery is used to correct the curve in the spine and secure the vertebrae
together.
Children are screened for scoliosis in most school systems, and adults are screened for
osteoporosis as they age.
Children monitoring and intervention may help scoliosis from becoming worse and allow the
greatest amount of independent activity.
Well hello again, it's Matt from Kenhub, and in this tutorial, we will be discussing
the thoracic spine.
The thoracic vertebrae, seen here on this image highlighted in green from a dorsal view,
are located in the middle section of the vertebral column, specifically inferior to the cervical
vertebrae and superior to the lumbar vertebrae.
These vertebrae span the large majority of the chest cavity area.
The vertebrae are separated by intervertebral discs of fibrocartilage, which are flexible
cartilage discs located between the bodies of two adjacent vertebrae that allow movement
in the spine and have a shock-absorbing or cushioning function as well.
In addition, to providing shock resistance and cushioning, the discs also help bind adjacent
vertebrae together.
There are 12 thoracic vertebrae denoted as T1 to T12, found in adult humans, and they
are situated in between the cervical and lumbar vertebrae, with a general sizing larger than
the cervical but smaller than the lumbar vertebrae.
For each of the 12 thoracic vertebrae, there was a corresponding pair of ribs attached
to them.
This is unique since no other vertebrae have ribs attached to them.
Thoracic vertebrae increase in size as they descend towards the lumbar vertebrae.
This is because the lower vertebrae must be able to support more of the body's weight
when a person is standing due to the effects of gravity.
Distinguishing features of the thoracic vertebrae include the presence of facets on the sides
of the bodies for articulation with the heads of the ribs, and facets on the transverse
processes of all except the 11th and 12th vertebrae for articulation with the tubercles
of the ribs.
The superior costal facet, seen here highlighted in green on this image of the lateral view
of the vertebrae, is a fossa where the head of the rib articulates.
The inferior costal facet also articulates with the head of a rib, however, it is located
on the lower edge of the body of the vertebra.
The costal facet of the transverse process of the vertebrae is a facet for articulation
of the vertebrae with the tubercle of the rib.
In addition, the spinous processes are relatively more pointed than other vertebrae, and angle
sharply downward.
The body of a thoracic vertebra, seen here highlighted in green, is somewhat hard shaped.
This video is more fun than reading a textbook, right?
If you want more videos, interactive quizzes, articles, and an atlas of human anatomy, click
on the Take Me to Kenhub button.
It is time to say goodbye to your old textbooks, and say hello to your new anatomy learning
partner, Kenhub.
See you there!
Hi there, I'm Dr. Gary Simmons of Korean Clinic Neurosurgery and I want to talk to
you today about complications of spinal surgery.
Now we'll be talking about all types of spinal surgeries and a lot of them are a tremendous
help if you are in big trouble with your spine.
Obviously, we try to keep surgery down to a minimum and the predominant reason to keep
surgery down to a minimum is no matter how much precautions we use, no matter how well
trained your surgeons are, no matter how many years of experience they have, you can always
have complications.
The spine is a very tough piece of machinery surrounding some of the most delicate structures
in your body, your spinal cord and your nerves and it is so easy to have problems.
So there are multiple types of complications that can occur with any type of spinal surgery.
For example, you can be paralyzed by spinal surgery.
Where the surgery is, anywhere below there, can be paralyzed under worst case scenarios.
And I can tell you, it's not like Hollywood where the surgeon says, oops, and slips with
a knife and cuts everything, there can be big, nasty problems like paralysis, even when
it seems like the surgery went perfectly fine.
Luckily, that's very uncommon.
An individual nerve can certainly be damaged badly in surgery and you could get weak in
one muscle group or two or so.
For example, if your C6, a cervical sixth nerve, were damaged in surgery, you might
be weak permanently in your biceps muscle, not paralyzed everywhere, but permanently
weak in a specific muscle.
As a matter of fact, probably one of the more common nerves to be injured is the deltoid
muscle which pulls up your shoulder and your arm like this.
But an individual nerve can be significantly damaged even when things seem to go well.
How could that be?
We don't always know.
It might be the straw that broke the camel's back phenomena, if you will, that that nerve
or the spinal cord was hanging on as best it could and then just the slightest bit of
manipulation and it goes downhill.
But we don't always know.
But a lot of times it's not some obvious disaster that occurs.
Now thankfully, things like that are uncommon, far more common and probably the most common
to me is when you don't get what you wanted out of the surgery.
You're having tremendous pain in your leg, the surgery is done and the pain in the leg
doesn't go away or tremendous pain in your back and the pain in your back doesn't go
away.
Well, we still consider that a complication.
The surgery didn't work.
We put you through all this and it didn't make things better.
That's because it doesn't always have to.
Sometimes we could be barking up the wrong tree or sometimes the nerve or the back.
They just don't want to respond the way we want them to.
So we consider that a complication.
Also more common but not as common as that would be infection.
We're opening up your body.
Sometimes we're working inside the body for hours on end using all sorts of instruments,
putting in rods and screws and different materials and bone materials and that sort
of thing and infection unfortunately is relatively common.
No matter what precautions we take, it's relatively common.
A few percentage of all spinal surgeries will have infections and if it gets infected sometimes
we have to go back to surgery to clean it up and treat with antibiotics for potentially
weeks after weeks after weeks.
So infection is a problem and it certainly is a consideration in any spinal surgery.
I'll talk about one further one at this juncture and that is something called a spinal fluid
leak.
Inside your spine, your nerves are contained in a bag of fluid.
It's the fluid that when they do a spinal tap, they put the needle into and draw off
some of this fluid.
It looks crystal clear.
It looks like spring water.
During any type of spinal surgery, that bag of fluid can get opened.
It can be torn.
It can be cut or sometimes we open it on purpose and then we seal it back up.
It loves to leak.
As soon as we put a patch on it or seal it up, it still loves to leak.
It's like a water balloon filled with clear spring water and it loves to leak and if that
leakage occurs too much, it can leak out of the wound and you can't have that.
That can lead to infection.
And so if there is a leakage of spinal fluid, even if it's contained under the skin, often
we'll want to go back and re-repair it.
And this happens a few percentage of cases, particularly in the lower back and particularly
in cases of lumbar stenosis.
So these are all real complications.
They can occur.
Thankfully, the really nasty stuff doesn't occur very often, but it can occur.
Another one to mention is when we're trying to make bones to grow together in a fusion,
well, sometimes the fusion doesn't occur.
The bones don't grow together the way we wanted it to and that's particularly true
in smokers.
So you smokers out there, it's real important to quit if you're going to get fusion surgery.
We can talk about other complications in other sessions, but those are some of the big ones.
Thank you very much for your time.
Bye-bye now.
This is a big day for Julie Williams.
Pain medicine specialist Dr. David Mock is implanting a device into her spine.
The goal is to reduce chronic debilitating pain.
I'd had a back surgery when I was 25 for a disc and I had pain down my left leg at that
time.
The pain went away until about a year ago.
It was down my left leg into my left foot and it was, gosh, sometimes 9 out of 10, burning,
mainly a burning pain.
Julie's pain got so bad it interfered with work as a physician's assistant.
Medication only masked it.
The pain was wrecking her quality of life.
So this is what a device might look like.
Dr. Mock says the spine stimulator emits electrical impulses.
I think of it as a pacemaker for the spine is probably the simplest way to look at that.
During the procedure, he and his team first place a temporary device at the level of the
spinal cord where the nerves are that generate the pain.
It gives off small electrical signals that mute what patients feel.
Instead of pain, they feel a pleasant buzzing sensation in the affected area.
To make sure it's in the right place, the surgical team briefly wakes up the patient.
They woke me up and I could feel that it was affecting the area that was painful.
So then they sewed up the incisions and took me to the recovery room.
If they get good relief, and that typically means 50-80% improvement, then we can come
back at a later date and put this in permanently.
Can I talk to you about a patient?
Sure.
Julie still feels pain sometimes in her hip or leg, but it is much, much less than what
she experienced before.
And if it bothers her, she can turn up the amount of stimulation, which decreases the
pain.
Now, she's back at work and back at life.
For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivian Williams.
First, a dilator, smaller than a pencil, is inserted under x-ray control down to the
involved level on one side of the midline spine.
A small tube is inserted over the dilator to create a portal down to the vertebra.
The endoscope is placed through the tube.
With this close-up operative view, your surgeon can then microsurgically remove the small
area of the lamina bones in the procedure called laminotomy.
Through this opening, he can access foramen bone spurs, nerve root, and disc hernia tissue.
Bone spurs on the foramen are removed.
This is called a foraminotomy.
A portion of the herniated disc is also removed.
This is called a discectomy.
The incision is closed with a stitch or two and the procedure is complete.
Hey guys, this is Alex from Brainbook. I'm super excited to show you this video.
I'm going to have Mr Ahmed Ramadan Sadek, who's one of the complex spine surgeons at the Royal
London Hospital and he's going to be taking you through the anatomy of the whole spine.
You can use this video as a primer for the next couple of videos where we're going to be taking
you through how we fix broken backs and necks. Watch this video through to the end, you will
not regret it and if you like it, don't forget to subscribe.
Hello, my name is Ahmed Sadek. I'm one of the complex spinal surgeons working at the Royal London
and today I'm going to be giving you a brief overview about the spinal column and the vertebra
and the nerves that are related to your spinal column. The spinal column is a really fascinating
structure because it has a central role as being the midline scaffold of your whole body
and it protects the most critical nerves that are involved with allowing you to walk, to run,
to use your hands and perform your activities of daily living. It's probably the most fascinating
collection of bones and nerves in the whole body and certainly they're critical to life.
The spinal column is like a geographical map. It's made up of different regions and those regions
serve different purposes. So right at the top you've got your neck, that's what we call your
cervical spine and that's made up of seven really interesting bones and below it is what we call
your thoracic spine. That's primarily your chest, your rib cavity and that's made up of 12 separate
vertebras, 12 separate bones that join with or are attached to the ribs. Below that is your lumbar
spine. This is the region where most people experience back pain and it's probably the most
common region that we operate on when we're dealing with back pain and pain associated
with nerves that go to the legs. Below that is your sacrum and that's made up of a collection
of bones that are integral to your pelvis. What this model demonstrates to some degree
are the different curvatures of the spine. So high up in your cervical spine just up here
it has a reverse C shape. Lower down in the thoracic spine it curves out the other way so
it's a true C and then in your lumbar spine you have another reverse C shape. From the front
you have vertebra, vertebra disc and that's the relationship all the way along the spine
and that's what these critical curves are what help keep you in balance, keep you upright and
allow you to look forward and straight. We can see the really critical vertebral arteries that pass
through small bony openings in the cervical spine to enter into the cranial vault into the brain
and these yellow plastic nerve roots as you can see exit just behind this these rather important
arteries. Moving down you can see the relationship of the nerve roots the discs and where they exit
relative to their corresponding vertebra changes so in the cervical spine these nerve roots exit
above their corresponding pedicle and below in the thoracic and the lumbar spine are slightly
different they exit below their corresponding vertebra. We've briefly discussed the whole
anatomy of the spine I think it's really important for us to just focus on what we call the motion
segment. What makes up a component of motion in your spine? Basically what you have is a vertebra
the vertebra is that that uniform unit within your vertebral column it's made up of a body which
is a big chunk of bone and it's the largest most significant part of the unit that makes up the
spinal column. The vertebra is attached to the posterior aspects of that single unit by what
we call pedicles Latin for feet their little attachments and they link up to what we call
the posterior elements the back part of the vertebra and that's made up of laminar and a
two laminar and a spinous process and laterally you have these bony knobs these out pouchings
which are called the transverse processes and they're central because they're the attachments of
all the big muscles that are critical in keeping you upright and facilitate movement. Within that
ring behind the body and in front of the laminar is the spinal canal that's the space in which you
have the sac the thick protective membrane that surrounds the cerebrous spinal fluid the clear
fluid that bathes your brain and spine sits the spinal cord and lower down the cord equina the tail
of the horse as it were because it's made up of a very fine collection of nerve roots. The vertebra
are connected to each other by discs we often hear a prolapse disc my disc pop now I've got severe
pain the disc is a it's a complex structure that cushions the force acting on your spine and there's
one disc between each vertebra the disc is made of a thick outer layer it's called the annulus
fibrosis and the name suggests that it's very fibrous and it is a fibrous ring that surrounds
a soft jelly-like material and that's where the dampener for all the forces is that disc specifically
the nucleus the middle part is full of water and that's the key component that allows it to cushion
impact on your spine and as we age it loses its water content and it makes the disc more vulnerable
to injury and damage. Okay it's starting back again at the most interesting area of the spine the
cervical spine as I mentioned it's made up of seven vertebra the first two vertebra are really
interesting they're really fascinating because they're very different they're called annulus
and axes and we draw those names from greek mythology the greek god historically you've
probably seen it in many structures carries the world on his shoulders and similarly c1 the first
vertebra of the cervical spine and c2 carry the head taking a closer look we have c1 c2 c1 is a
perfect ring it has no body and that allows it to form a joint with c2 because c2 has this
out pouching of bone which acts as a focus a pivot for the c1 to rotate and that's what
allows us to turn left and right. So here we have a model of the cervical spine it's made up of
seven separate vertebra one two three four five six and seven and as you remember the c1 is unique
it has no body it's a perfect ring and as you can see on this model the spinal cord runs straight
through the middle of the canal the critical artery that supply the brain uh the the hind
aspect of the brain are here either side and the exiting nerve roots are on the side so respectively
now as we mentioned the c2 is also very special in the sense it has this bony out pouching what
we call the peg or the dontoid peg pointing and protruding into the c1 ring and that's what allows
us to turn the c2 joins with the c3 and surprisingly and people don't realize this in addition to
having discs between the vertebra which demonstrated here you also have other joints and those joints
are what we call facet joints and you can see those quite clearly here and here and those are the
joints between respective vertebra and they again they're a focus of motion within the cervical spine
and you have these facet joints everywhere in your spine and they can be a focus a point of pain for
people so now we have a lumbar vertebra as you can see this is significantly bigger in size
than the cervical or thoracic vertebra these are also really really interesting structures
they have a very large body and that's primarily because they sit right at the bottom of your
spinal column and as you can imagine there's a huge amount of force acting upon them thanks a lot
for watching the video and if you enjoyed that don't forget to subscribe next week we're going
to be taking you through how we fix a broken lower back with lots of little cuts in the skin rods and
screws and we'll be showing you GoPro footage of an actual surgery see you next week
Hello, my name is Riley Palmer, an occupational therapist at Beaumont Health.
Here at Beaumont, we want to make sure that you have a successful recovery following spine
surgery.
So there are a few things you'll need to know.
We hope you find this instructional video both helpful and informative.
First, there are a few rules or precautions as you begin to move.
The acronym B-L-T can assist you with remembering these.
B stands for no bending, no bending forward or backwards at your spine.
L stands for no lifting, no lifting more than 5 to 10 pounds until allowed by your surgeon.
An example is a half gallon of milk is approximately 8 pounds.
This also applies to pushing and pulling.
T stands for no twisting, no twisting of the spine.
Keep your shoulders and hips aligned so that your trunk is moving as one unit.
After neck surgery, avoid turning your head side to side, looking downward toward the
floor or looking up toward the ceiling.
And avoid reaching or raising your arms over your head as much as possible.
While lying on your back, bend your knees up.
Use your legs as leveraged to log row toward your side while being careful to keep your
head, shoulders, hips aligned to avoid twisting your spine.
While bringing your legs over the edge of the bed, use your arms to raise your torso
upright.
When sitting, back up until you feel the bed against both legs.
Reach back for the bed as you sit.
While lowering yourself to one side, raise your legs up onto the bed.
Use your arms to help you roll onto your back.
If sleeping on your back, place 1 or 2 pillows under your knees to relax your hip muscles.
If sleeping on your side, place 1 or 2 pillows between your knees.
Be mindful to sit in chairs with back support and armrests whenever possible.
Sit upright and keep your hips level with your knees.
Scoot forward to the edge of the chair, being careful not to bend forward at your waist.
Place your feet underneath you and use the armrests for support while pushing yourself
up to stand using your legs.
Things that you took for granted before, like getting into a car, can be a little bit tricky
now.
Let's see what steps you can use to make this easier.
Have your caregiver open the car door as far as possible.
Be sure the front seat is as far back as it will go.
A large plastic bag over the seat can assist you maneuvering easier.
Approach the car with your walker.
Turn so your back is facing the seat.
Back up until you feel the car seat behind both legs.
Placing one hand on the car seat or door jam and the other hand on the car dashboard.
Bend your hips and knees to lower yourself down to the seat while keeping your spine
straight.
Bring one leg into the car at a time, being careful to keep your hips and shoulders aligned
to avoid twisting your spine.
And as always, wear your seatbelt.
Bring one leg out of the car at a time, being careful to keep your shoulders and hips aligned
to avoid twisting your spine.
Stand forward until both feet are firmly on the ground.
Then using the car seat and dashboard and your legs, come to a standing position.
Some things that were simple for you before, like getting dressed, will require new techniques
until you make a full recovery.
New adaptive techniques will be necessary after having spine surgery.
As you will now have restrictions that prevent you from bending, remember your three spine
precautions as you get dressed.
The acronym BLT can assist you with remembering these.
When taking off your socks, sit up in a chair or at the edge of a bed and cross your legs
up to you.
Keep a straight back and do not bend down to your feet or twist your spine.
Once your leg is crossed, then remove your sock and repeat the same step for the other
sock.
When putting on your socks, sit up in a chair or at the edge of the bed and cross your legs
up to you.
Keep your back straight and do not bend down to your feet or twist your spine.
Once your leg is crossed, then put your sock on and then repeat the same step for the other
sock.
When putting on your pants and or underwear, sit up in a chair or at the edge of the bed
and cross your legs up to you.
Keep your back straight and do not bend down to your feet or twist your spine.
When getting dressed for the day, put underwear on, bringing them to thigh high, then do the
same with your pants so that you are only standing one time versus two times.
Once your leg is crossed, then feed your leg into the pants leg, then repeat the same
step for the other leg.
When standing, first get and maintain your balance.
Then proceed to pull up your underwear and pants at the same time to conserve energy.
We hope this video was helpful in your recovery after surgery.
Beaumont physical and occupational therapists work as a team to provide the overall care
and making you independent and achieving the goals of getting stronger and improving
your mobility.
Beaumont is here for you every step of the way and we are committed to excellence in
medical treatment.
If you have any questions or need more information about our services, please contact Beaumont
Orthopedics.
Thank you for choosing Beaumont.
Hi, my name's Andrew and one of the family of medical students. Can I just check your
name and date of birth, please? Sure, it's James, 13th December 1989.
Nice to meet you, James. Today I've been asked to examine your spine. This will firstly
involve me watching you walk, and then I'll look at the spine, feel down the spine for
any pain, and then we'll do some movements as well. Would that be okay? That sounds fine.
Are you in any pain at all before we start? I know. Okay, we can start the examination.
Okay, I'm just going to inspect you walking. Could you just walk to the end of the room
and back for me?
I'm now going to feel down your spine, James. Do let me know if there's any pain at all.
Can I just turn into face of the wall behind you?
That's great, you can turn back around. We're just going to assess some movements now. First
of all, could you look up at the ceiling for me? And look down at your toes. That's great.
Look over your right shoulder. Look over your left shoulder. That's great. And take your
right ear to your right shoulder, and left ear to your left shoulder. That's brilliant.
Now, James, if you could just bend over and touch your toes. Brilliant, and all the way
back up. And now with your right hand reach down your right leg as far as possible. And
the same on the other side, please, James. Fantastic. And now lean backwards as far as
you're comfortably able to. And forwards. If you can now cross your arms for me, and
turn your body round to the right as far as you can, and to the left as far as you can.
Now back to the middle. I'm just going to feel your lower spine now. And now I'm just
going to mark your skin with some pen. And now bend forward and touch your toes. I'm
now going to lift each leg up straight. Do let me know if you get any pain in your back
or down your leg. And the same on the other side. I'm now going to lift each leg. Do let
me know if you have any pain at all. Okay, James, that completes the examination. Thank
you very much. Okay, thank you.
Let's next talk about spinal nerves. So here we have a cross-section through
thoracic vertebra with an associated spinal cord and spinal nerve levels and
so with to understand spinal nerves there's a couple of things we need to
know. Roots, spinal nerve trunk, and then the ramai. So to understand them let's
take a look at this tree and we look at this tree what do we notice? Well there's
roots and there's a tree trunk and there's branches in the tree. That's
everything we need to know about spinal nerves except we just turn it on its
side like this. So there's the roots and the trunks and the branches and then we
go shing and we stick it up in the right corner and what do we see? Roots, trunks,
roots, trunk, and branches. So when we look down we see roots, spinal nerve,
trunk, and ramai and the term ramus or ramai for plural means branches. Roots
lead into a trunk, lead into branches just like a tree. And so there we have
the roots, spinal nerve, trunk, and the ramai. So first let's take a look at the
roots. There are millions of neurons bringing sensory information to the
spinal cord and there are millions of motor neurons coursing from the spinal
cord to all the muscles in the organs. So it begs the question how do these
neurons not get tied in a knot? So let's do an analogy for a minute. Dublin City
Center. I lived in Dublin for a couple years. I love it. That's actually really
creepy. That's better. Okay, there's a cute little leprechaun. So let's talk
about Dublin City Center for a minute. So here we have a picture of Ireland and
what we're gonna do is we're gonna zoom in to Dublin, the capital of Ireland, a
little bit more. Dublin's a really, really old city so they've got people that
goes back millennia. So when they first had the city and you look at the city
center they didn't build roads for like big lorries, really big trucks. So as we
start zooming in more and more on Dublin and get more and more, see all those
orange lines? Those are major roads getting close as you can see approaching
Dublin. We see we're getting closer to city center and we're getting closer to
city center. You see the Dublin as we zoom in. I want you to notice something.
We're zooming in now close to Dublin. Look at that. We now have, once we're
downtown, one-way streets. Because of how busy it gets in the smaller roads to
help ensure that traffic moves smoothly, the closer we are to the city center,
where all the hub of activity occurs, we have one-way streets. One-way streets,
spinal routes are like one-way street signs, where here we've got city center,
Dublin city center, and then we have one-way streets to help ensure that as
we get close to the hub activity, the Dublin city center, things stay
organized. So Dublin city center is our spinal cord. That's where the hub of
activity. That's where all information at that segmental level is coming in, where
the processing occurs, and then all that motor activity comes out. So where one-way
streets are the routes. One route goes in, the dorsal route, and one route goes out,
the motor route. One-way streets, and once we get away from the city center, we get
two-way streets. So the ventral route. So here we've got the ventral route there,
and the ventral route is housing all motor neurons. And so there is a somatic
motor neuron in the ventral horn, and it sends its axon out and going towards the
periphery. One street. So the ventral route only has motor neurons that are
taking efferent information away from the spinal cord. Now the dorsal route is
here, and that dorsal route is only going in one direction, to the spinal cord. So
there we have the cell body and that dorsal root ganglion, and the information
as the arrow shows is coming in to that dorsal horn gray matter. Only one
direction. So we have, the way to remember this is the abbreviation Dave, where the
dorsal route is bringing efferent information in, and the ventral route is
taking efferent information out. Just remember Dave. So let's take a look now
at the spinal nerve trunk, and there we have that spinal nerve trunk, and the
spinal nerve trunk is what joins the roots and the ramai. This is a two-way
street, so now we have both sensory and motor information collecting the two-way
street. So let's take a look at this ventral ramus. Here is the ventral ramus,
and that ventral ramus is going to the body wall and limbs, and coming from the
body wall in limbs, both taking motor and sensory information. The ventral ramai is
what we pretty much focus with regards to those ramai as we go throughout the
course, with the exception of week one when we're really focusing on the back.
So there we have a ventral ramus associated with that one spinal cord
level, but take a look all along segmentally from cervical, thoracic, lumbar,
and sacral regions down to the coccygeal. Each of those lines represents a ventral
ramus, and often these ventral ramai form a plexus in the neck called the
cervical plexus that goes to the body wall muscles of the neck, or a brachial
plexus that just goes to the muscles in the skin of our upper limb, and then we
have our intercostal nerves that are just coursing within the between, below the
ribs, going to intercostal muscles, and the skin overlying the ribs. And then we
have our lumbar plexus that does part of the body wall and part of the lower limb
and our sacral plexus that's really going to lower limb, and so these plexuses
of ventral ramai are coursing to different elements of the body. Alright,
now the dorsal ramus here is what's going to the skin of the back and to the
deep back muscles, and it's a one-way street, so it goes to deep back muscles or
the erector spinae and transversal spinalis muscles, also known as the
paraspinal muscles, or the intrinsic back muscles, or the true deep back muscles.
I'm losing my breath, they're all called so many similar things, but those
deep back muscles, the erector spinae, transversal spinalis, and so forth. In
addition, it also goes to the skin of the back to the mid-scapular line.
You know, I still remember having the conversation with him, him calling me at work and telling
me there was this very scary thing that could cause permanent damage.
It was a little rough, kind of getting our minds wrapped around the idea that this was
actually happening.
I'm a runner, physical activity has always been my outlet, the way that I balance myself
out.
I was stretching to go for a run and I guess I stretched a little bit too far and I heard
something pop in my back and instantly knew something was wrong.
I had an MRI done.
I had a slightly herniated disc and a tumor.
Initially, you know, just finding out, you know, obviously that you have a tumor in your
spine.
It's a very scary thing and that fear kind of permeates into everything.
I was terrified.
I was absolutely terrified.
I'm an anxious person by nature and I felt really uncomfortable with the doctors that
we'd seen previously.
They wanted to cut me open right away so I was hesitant to jump into a situation where
I didn't have all the information I needed right away.
Aaron first came to my clinic in June 2011 and he was diagnosed with a spinal cord tumor.
It's called a schwannoma.
It is typically a benign tumor but in 5% of patients, it's malignant.
By the time he came to us, his symptoms had subsided.
He had a first opinion where he was told he needed emergent surgery and he was told that
there's a significant risk of a dorsiflexion weakness or foot drop.
Now, a lot of times if we feel that a tumor is benign, because of the location of the
tumor, because of the nerves involved, because of the function and the importance of that
function on somebody's ability to walk, let alone run, we may just watch it to see the
rate of growth.
He said, as long as you're comfortable enough to live your life and do the things that you
need to do, work and exercise until it starts to grow and cause more problems, we don't
need to do the surgery.
We'll just monitor it.
I wanted to make sure that I gave him an additional five, six, seven years of a working neurological
system.
After two and a half years of watching this tumor, its symptoms as well as radiographic
progression, we had evidence that had gotten significantly bigger.
We decided to proceed with a conversation with him about the need for surgery at that
point.
But I said to Aaron, we do a lot of these surgeries.
People seek us out from all over the world for this kind of care.
He made me understand the consequences, the good and the bad of the surgery.
He gave me confidence that I was going to be okay or have the best chance that I could
possibly have to be okay.
The day of the surgery, somebody who is super anxious, the whole trip down Toppkins that
morning my wife kept looking at me and asking if I was okay because I was placid.
I was calm.
I had a one year old son and I was determined to come out of it okay for him.
The operation took I believe about four and a half, five hours.
It went smoothly.
We went around the tumor so we don't injure any of the nerves or any of the functions
that was there.
We were able to remove the entire tumor and there was no damage to the nerves.
As anesthesia was waking him up, I stood at the side of the bed and I asked him to move
his ankle up and down and when he moved it I felt a lot of relief.
Right now I feel great.
I feel like my life is back to where it was.
I'm not perfect after a surgery like that but I can touch my toes standing up.
I'm back to running almost as much as I was running before.
We've watched it for the past year, year and a half and things are looking very stable
and there's no need for radiation and no need for any adjuvant therapy.
Right before the surgery I was just very nervous that I wouldn't be able to be the kind of
father that I wanted to be for my son.
We have a second son now.
We had him six weeks ago.
I can be the kind of father I want to be so everything's good, everything's good.
Well, hello there, it's Matt from Kenhub, and in this tutorial we will do a quick overview
of the cervical spine.
The cervical vertebrae are the smallest vertebrae in the spinal column.
There are seven individual bones, and the first, second, and seventh are uniquely shaped,
whereas the third to the sixth are similarly shaped.
Next we will discuss the third to sixth vertebrae, then the first, second, and seventh.
The cervical vertebrae C3 to C6 have small bodies with posterior and lateral pedicles.
The short, spinous processes are bifid in shape, whereas the vertebral foramina are
shaped like large triangles.
In each transverse process there is a foramen transversarium, and at the level of C6 the
vertebral artery enters the corresponding foramen.
The anterior tubercle and the posterior tubercle are the anterior and posterior portions of
the transverse processes.
The first cervical vertebra, C1, otherwise known as the atlas, as well as the first vertebrae
in the spinal column.
It supports the skull, which sits directly above it, and it only has an anterior arch
and a posterior arch, with no body or spinous process.
Laterally, large bone masses help to support the occipital condyles of the skull superiorly
and balance the atlas upon the axis inferiorly.
As with the other vertebrae, the foramen transversarium is located within a large transverse process.
The anterior arch has a dental fovea, where the dens of the axis articulate with the atlas.
The posterior arch contains a groove for the vertebral artery, as well as a posterior
tubercle, which is a rudiment of the spinous process.
The axis, or C2, as it is clinically called, has its odontoid process, or dense, located
on its superior surface.
It has a large bifid spinous process, and in contrast to C1, a small transverse process
which houses its foramen transversarium.
Lastly, C7, which is also called the vertebra prominence, is the only cervical vertebra
whose spinous process is not bifid.
It is called the most prominent vertebra because its long spinous process protrudes from under
the skin and is visible to the naked eye.
It has a large transverse process like the atlas, which also holds the foramen transversarium
that encapsulates the vertebral veins and occasionally the vertebral arteries.
See you there!
My name is Dr. Safi and I'm an orthopedic spine surgeon at the University of Pennsylvania.
And I'm Dr. Yoon.
I am a neurosurgeon specializing in complex spine surgery.
Today we're going to discuss what the right type of surgery is for you.
I have many patients who come to me both through Penn or from outside institutions who have
significant pain.
Often these patients will have leg pain or arm pain and or back pain.
We also treat many patients with severe spinal deformities and for these patients we often
have a conversation in depth about whether they're a candidate for minimally invasive
spine surgery or traditional open surgery.
There are type of conditions where it becomes more urgent that the decision for surgery needs
to be made fast.
But for elective procedures you want to talk to all the specialists, have all the options
and understand the risks and benefits of each one.
Once you get to the point where you need a spine surgery there are multiple options.
One option is having an open where midline incision is made and you can address a more
complex disease and there's another type of surgery that can be done that's a minimally
invasive option where the surgeons can make a smaller incision and a more targeted approach
to address a pathology and that really depends on the type of pathology the patients have.
Certain conditions such as herniated discs are often best treated with minimally invasive
approaches in which an incision less than 20 millimeters is typically made and the patients
go home the same day.
There is also another option, Dr. Yoon performs endoscopic surgery.
Can you tell us a little bit about that?
So the endoscopic surgery is a special type of MIS operation where the surgeon uses an
endoscopic camera to remove a piece of disc or open up an opening for the nerves.
So instead of using a tubular which is a little bit larger diameter is about 20 millimeters,
we use about 8 millimeter tubular ports and then the camera is passed and then the disc
can be removed or the frame can be opened.
Now not everybody is a candidate for endoscopic surgeries but it's a type of minimally invasive
surgery that can really minimize any collateral damage so the patient has less pain postoperatively.
Certain surgeries however such as complex spinal deformities which I often treat are
not amenable to minimally invasive but some spinal deformities surgeries are amenable
to minimally invasive surgery.
It's just important that you discuss with your surgeon those specifics and your interest
in minimally invasive surgery.
Traditionally the surgery are done from the back when the patient is laying down on the
table and you approach the spine from the back making the incision this way.
The side operation, direct lateral interbody fusions are done to the side so instead of
making an incision from the back we make an incision on the patient's flank and then we
can get directly down to the disc and this is a very powerful operation that's minimally
invasive where the patient has a abnormal curvature.
We can approach the spine from the side and really correct their deformity and then also
not disrupt all their muscles to do that.
I agree.
I've had many patients who have done this minimally invasive fusion option who go home
the same day from surgery.
Typically our patients for an open fusion stay in the hospital three maybe even four
days but with the minimally invasive option they can go home either the same day or the
next day.
With patients who have a severe curvature of the spine or scoliosis they sometimes are
a candidate for minimally invasive but sometimes not and so we have to discuss that with the
patient.
Sometimes it's just a risk benefit discussion of whether the patient feels that they want
minimally invasive and we discuss how that would benefit them versus an open approach.
So it's really a discussion with the patient about what they feel is best for them.
If their disease really involves multi-level meaning that it's not just the one side of
the herniated disc is from the entire lumbar spine then the risk and benefit of doing the
minimally invasive spine surgery goes down.
So in that case an open approach may be a better option for that patient.
There are two different type of spine surgeons like Dr. Safi who is an orthopedic spine specialist
and myself and neurosurgery spine specialist.
We both perform a minimally invasive surgery as well as the open traditional surgeries
but we both have a different training but we work with each other.
So for the patient you want to go to a place where you can have both representation and
you have experts from both neurosurgery and orthopedics.
Often at the spine center Dr. Yoon or myself will send each other our patients to have
a discussion about that with other providers here.
For example in our center we have weekly spine conference where not just two surgeons
but we have both orthopedic departments and the neurosurgery department.
All the doctors get together and review a case.
So you get opinions from at least 20-30 providers who offer their opinion and really formulate
the best individualized and customized treatment plan and you can get that at Penn Medicine
Spine Center.
Please go to the Penn Medicine Spine Center website for more information.
Hi guys, this is Peter from Anatomy Zone and in this tutorial we're going to take a look
at the anatomy of the spinal cord.
So to begin with we'll look at the external features and then we'll move on to some of
the basic internal anatomy of the spinal cord.
So what we're looking at here is a model of the vertical column containing the spinal
cord and you can see the brainstem at the top.
So rostrally or at the top the spinal cord is continuous with the medulla oblongata
of the brainstem and in adults the spinal cord extends to the intervertebral disc between
vertebral bodies L1 and L2.
So I've just zoomed in to the lumbar region of the vertebral column and if I rotate the
model around slightly you can see the distal end of the spinal cord terminating at this
level between vertebra L1 and L2.
So the spinal cord is essentially a segmental structure so it consists of 31 segments.
You've got 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral and 1 coxigial segment and these
segments give rise to spinal nerves.
So you can see the spinal nerves coming off either side of the spinal cord and these spinal
nerves are paired so you've got spinal nerves emerging on either side of the spinal cord.
So you've got 31 segments of the spinal cord giving rise to 31 pairs of spinal nerves.
So just taking a look at the shape of the spinal cord itself, you'll notice that it's
essentially a cylindrical structure but there are two areas of the spinal cord which are
slightly enlarged so you've got a cervical enlargement and a lumbar enlargement.
So I've just switched over to a diagram to illustrate this and on the left we're looking
at the anterior aspect of the spinal cord and on the right we've got the posterior aspect.
So you can see that there's this sort of bulging out of the spinal cord in the cervical region
and the same in the lumbar region.
So the cervical enlargement corresponds to the segment C4 to T1, the lumbar enlargement
corresponds to segments L1 to S3 and it's in these areas where the nerve plexuses which
innovate the upper and lower limbs respectively emerge.
So this is why that area of the spinal cord is thickened because a lot of nerves supplying
movement in the upper and lower limbs emerge from these areas.
So just coming back to the 3D model we're taking a look at the distal end of the spinal
cord and you can see that it terminates in this conical structure which I've highlighted
in green.
And this is known as the conus medullaris and extending from the tip of the conus medullaris
you've got a strand of connective tissue which attaches the conus medullaris to the first
coxigil vertebra and this strand is called the phylum terminale.
So I've just drawn that on there in yellow.
So as you can see the lumbar and sacral spinal nerves kind of hang down from the conus medullaris
and they form this kind of arrangement which looks like a horse's tail.
So the Latin for this is corda equina and this is what that collection of spinal nerves
is known as.
So just coming back to this model here with the vertical column shown you can see how
the pairs of spinal nerves emerge from between the vertebra.
So just drawing this on in green so you can see the 31 pairs of spinal nerves emerging
from the intervertebral foramina between the vertebra.
So let's just take a look at how these spinal nerves attach to the spinal cord.
So what we're looking at now is the cervical region of the spinal cord and you can see
that I've removed one of the cervical vertebra just so we can take a look at how the spinal
nerves attach to the spinal cord.
So you can see that there's these little rootlets which attach to the spinal cord and these
rootlets then converge to form the ventral and dorsal roots.
So if I just rotate the model round you can see that there's a root at the front so that's
the ventral root and a root at the back so that's the dorsal root.
And these roots converge to form the spinal nerve itself and the spinal nerve exits the
vertebral column via the intervertebral foramina.
So immediately after leaving the intervertebral foramina you can see that there's another
division so the spinal nerve divides into a ventral and dorsal ramus.
So it's not actually shown clearly on this model here but the ventral ramus is a lot
thicker than the dorsal ramus.
So essentially what you need to know is that the ventral ramus supplies the muscles and
skin of the front of the body and the dorsal ramus supplies the muscles and skin of the
back.
So if I just rotate the model round a slightly more you'll notice that there's this kind
of swelling of the dorsal root.
So this is known as the dorsal root ganglion and this dorsal root ganglion contains the
cell bodies of the primary afferent neurons which enter into the dorsal horn of the spinal
cord.
So the cell bodies of the ventral root are actually contained within the grey mat of
the spinal cord.
So I'll talk about this in more detail in the next part of the tutorial but essentially
you've got primary afferent neurons entering via the dorsal root and you've got the efferent
neurons leaving via the ventral root.
So how can you remember which is afferent, which is efferent and which contains sensory
and which contains motor?
Well you can use the mnemonic afferent arrives and efferent exits.
So with any structure in the nervous system afferent will mean information is brought
to that structure and efferent means information is taken away from that structure.
So afferent arrives, efferent exits.
And then with regard to the ventral and dorsal roots you can use the mnemonic same Dave.
So sensory afferent, motor efferent, same and then Dave, dorsal afferent, ventral efferent.
So using that mnemonic you can work out that the dorsal root carries sensory afferent information
and the ventral root carries motor efferent information.
So in the next part of the tutorial we're going to take a look at a section, a transverse
section, so if I just rotate the model around to the side like that we're going to take
a section through the spinal cord like this and we'll look at the internal structure of
the spinal cord and the layers that cover it, so the meninges.
The cervical spine has the important job of supporting the skull and allowing us to move
our head to direct our vision.
The cervical spine also protects the spinal cord, the connection between our brain and
the rest of our body.
Two common anatomic terms are useful as they relate to the cervical spine.
The term anterior refers to the front of the neck.
The term posterior refers to the back of the neck.
The human spine is made up of 24 spinal bones called vertebra.
Vertebra are stacked on top of one another to form the spinal column.
The spinal column is the body's main upright support.
Seven vertebra make up the cervical spine, often referred to as C1 to C7.
The top vertebra, C1, connects to the bottom of the skull.
The cervical spine curves slightly inward and ends where C7 joins the top of the thoracic
spine.
The base of the skull sits on top of C1, also called the atlas.
Two thick bony arches form a large hole through the center of the atlas.
This opening is large because the spinal cord is wider where it first exits the brain and
skull.
The atlas has two relatively large bony projections on each side.
The atlas sits on top of the C2 vertebra, also called the axis.
The axis has a large bony knob on top called the dens.
The dens points up and fits through a hole in the atlas.
This specialized connection between the axis and the atlas gives the neck most of its ability
to turn to the left and right.
Each vertebra throughout the spine is made of the same parts.
The main section of each cervical vertebra from C2 to C7 is formed by a round block
of bone called the vertebral body.
A bone ring attaches to the back of the vertebral body.
This ring is formed by two pedicles that connect to the back of the vertebral body and two
lamina that join the pedicles to complete the ring.
When the vertebra are stacked on top of each other, the bone rings form a hollow tube that
surrounds the spinal cord.
The inside of this hollow tube is called the spinal canal.
The bone rings provide a protective roof over the spinal cord.
A bony knob projects posteriorly at the same point where the two lamina bones join together
at the back of the spine.
These projections, called spinous processes, can be felt as you rub your fingers up and
down the back of your spine.
Each vertebra in the spine has two bony knobs that point out to the side, one on the left
and one on the right.
These bony projections are called transverse processes.
Unlike the rest of the spine, the cervical vertebra have an opening that passes down
through each transverse process.
This opening, called the transverse foramen, provides a passageway for arteries that run
up each side of the neck to supply the back of the brain with blood.
Between each pair of vertebra are two joints called facet joints.
The surface of the facet joint is covered by articular cartilage.
Articular cartilage is a smooth, rubbery material that covers the ends of most joints.
It allows the ends of the bones to move against each other smoothly, with minimal friction.
These joints connect the vertebra together and slide against one another to allow the
neck to move in many directions.
Except for the very top of the cervical spine, each cervical vertebra has two facet joints
on each side.
The facet joints on top connect to the vertebra above.
The ones below join the vertebra below.
When the vertebra stack on top of one another, an opening is formed on each side of the
spine called a neural foramen.
A nerve root leaves the spinal cord through this opening, one on the left and one on the
right.
The spinal cord travels through the spinal canal, the hollow tube of bone created by the
stacked vertebra.
The spinal cord is made up of millions of nerve fibers.
Two large nerves called nerve roots branch off the spinal cord at each level where two
vertebra come together, one on the left and one on the right.
These nerve roots branch into the nerves that travel into the upper extremities, upper body,
and to certain organs.
Ligaments are strong connective tissues that attach bones to other bones.
Several long ligaments connect on the front and back sections of the vertebra.
The anterior longitudinal ligament runs lengthwise down the front of the vertebral bodies.
The posterior longitudinal ligament attaches on the back of the vertebral bodies.
The ligamentum flavum is a long elastic band that connects to the front surface of each
of the lamina bones.
Each set of facet joints is also surrounded by a joint capsule that is made up of ligaments.
A special structure in the spine called an intervertebral disc sits between each pair
of vertebra.
An intervertebral disc is made of two parts.
In the center of each intervertebral disc is a spongy material called a nucleus pulposus.
The nucleus pulposus provides most of the shock absorption in the spine.
The nucleus is surrounded by the annulus, a series of strong ligamentus rings that attach
to the vertebra above and below the intervertebral disc.
The anterior cervical area is covered with muscles that run from the ribcage and collarbone
to the cervical vertebra, jaw, and skull.
The posterior cervical muscles cover the bones along the back of the spine and make up the
bulk of the tissues on the back of the neck.
A good way to understand the anatomy of the cervical spine is by looking at a single spinal
segment.
A spinal segment includes two vertebra separated by an intervertebral disc, the nerves that
leave the spinal cord between each pair of vertebra, and the small facet joints that
link each level of the spinal column.
The intervertebral disc separates the two vertebral bodies of the spinal segment.
The facet joints and intervertebral discs work together to allow bending and rotating
of the cervical spine.
The facet joints slide while the disc works like a flexible connection between the two
vertebra.
It is probably quite clear that the cervical spine is a complex machine with an important
job to do.
Understanding the structure and function of the cervical spine can help you better understand
how problems in the neck can cause pain and dysfunction, enabling you to become more involved
in your health care and better able to care for your neck problem.
Hi, I'm Dr. Jessica Schellack, I'm an orthopedic spine surgeon with the Texas Back Institute.
Spondylosis is a term that essentially refers to the aging of the spine.
As the spine ages, we've talked in the past videos about some of the changes that occur
with dehydration of the discs, causing the discs to lose some of their shock-absorbing
function, so they collapse down and then the back part of the disc kind of bulges into
the spinal canal.
Once again, it's analogous to a tire that's a little bit low on air pressure.
The tire volume still has to go somewhere, it's just not as tense as it once was.
And that's exactly what happens to the spinal discs as we age.
Other things that also occur is that with that loss of height, the ligaments in the
back part of the spinal canal are no longer under as much tension.
So they can actually buckle and push into the spinal canal.
So other changes that occur that are part of the spondylosis spectrum, the connector
joints which are called facets, they become arthritic, more bone grows so bone spurs can
form and that can also contribute to spinal stenosis, which is one of the presentations
of spondylosis or spondylotic changes.
So really spondylosis can happen throughout the spine, it does happen throughout the spine
as we age, it happens in our neck, our mid back and our low back, but for the most part
symptoms occur in the upper and lower parts of our spine, so in our neck and our low back
just because of the mobility in these areas, that's what typically will result in symptoms
for patients that ultimately end up in an office visit here.
Spondylosis meaning aging of the spine doesn't necessarily imply that you will need any treatment
at all, in fact for the majority of patients, spondylosis goes with essentially some occasional
aches and pains that we all chalk up to getting older, maybe a couple days here and there
where you modify your activities or take a few extra Tylenol or Advil and go on with
your life.
It's really more rare for patients to have significant changes that lead to arm pain
or leg pain, stenosis, herniated discs, all of the conditions that we talked about that
may lead a patient to come in to be seen, but for the most part, spondylosis is again
a normal part of the aging process that is pretty minimally symptomatic and often can
be managed with just conservative treatments and certainly if spondylosis gets to the point
where it's truly symptomatic and refractory to conservative measures, there are probably
surgical options that would be specific to a particular patient.
Hello, my name is Ottergill. I've been asked in an examination if you'll spine today.
Would that be alright?
Yeah, absolutely.
Terrific. So to begin, could you confirm your name and date of birth please?
Yes, Matt Comforts, first of June 1996.
Thank you. To start, if I could get you to stand up please and take off your shirt to begin with.
And if you could turn to face me with your palms out for me?
Superb. I'm just going to have a walk around and have a look and see if there's any problems that I can see with your back.
And if you could turn to face the wall for me here.
And again, going to have a look over your back.
And everything seems to be nice and normal there.
So to begin, I'm just going to press down your back and see if there's any pain or tenderness.
So to begin, have you got any discomfort on your back?
No, not at all.
So I'm just going to start off pressing over the bony bits.
Tell me if there's any discomfort here.
Yeah, sure.
No pain or tenderness there?
No.
I'm going to do the same again, but this time I'm going to press over the muscles on your spine.
Once more, tell me if there's any discomfort here.
Any problems there?
No, not at all.
Superb.
Now we're going to move on, we're going to do some movements if that's okay.
So if you could stay facing the wall, to start off is there any pain in your neck?
No.
Could I get you to try and touch your left shoulder to your left ear please?
Okay, and back to centre.
And touch your right ear to your right shoulder.
Okay, and back up, that's fine.
If I could get you to turn your head, keeping your body stable, so turn your head all the way to the left for me.
Okay, and then turn all the way to the right for me.
Okay, and back to centre.
And if you could put your chin on your chest, and then lean all the way back with your neck.
Okay, any pain or discomfort there?
No.
Superb.
We're now going to do some movements with your chest, moving your arms.
So if you could take your left arm, and try and reach down to your left knee please.
And then back up again.
Superb.
And we'll do the same on the opposite side.
So if you could take your right arm, reach into your left knee.
Terrific.
Was there any problems or discomfort with that?
No.
Okay, so if I could get you to face me here for me.
And I'm going to come to the side, and I'm going to get you to try and bend down to touch your toes.
Okay.
So I'm going to have a look here, and I'm going to put my fingers on your lower back.
So if you could try and reach, bending from the waist to touch your toes for me.
That's terrific.
And then come back.
And then if you could bend backwards for me.
Excellent.
Thank you.
To finish off from here, if I could get you to sit on the bed.
Okay.
And if you could cross your arms over your chest for me.
And what I want you to do is turn your body to the left for me.
And then turn your body all the way to the right.
Any pain or problems when you've done that?
No.
Superb.
So from there, if I could get you to lie on the bed for me.
Okay.
And if you could, I'll take that for you.
And if you could raise this leg up as high as you can.
Excellent.
Any problems with that?
No.
Okay.
And relax down.
And same again, this leg up as high as you can.
Terrific.
Any problems there?
No.
Now I'm going to do the same.
I'm going to move your legs if that's all right.
Yeah.
So I'm going to do the same.
Just going to pick up.
No.
And I'm just going to push on your foot.
Okay.
Does that change things?
No.
Superb.
Same again on this leg.
Lifting up.
And push down.
Any problems there?
No.
Superb.
Thank you.
So if I could get you to swing your legs around, we're going to have a quick look at the reflexes.
So we're going to have a look at your arms and your legs.
Are you right or left handed?
Right.
Okay.
So I'm going to start off with your right hand if that's okay.
So relax.
Take the weight.
And that's terrific.
I would do the same on this side.
Relax for me.
Okay.
And again, let me take the weight.
And once more, let me take the weight.
Superb.
Now we're going to look over your knees.
Do you have any problems with your knees?
No.
Okay.
So I'm just going to press there.
And one, two, three.
Excellent.
I would do the same thing on this side.
Divide yourself.
Excellent.
Right.
That completes all of those parts.
So to finish off, I'm just going to check the pulses on your feet.
And your cat refill is good there.
I think that concludes our examination.
So thank you very much for your time.
Do you have any questions for myself?
No, not at all.
Okay.
Brilliant.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
The degenerative conditions of the spine are due to arthritis in the spine.
It happens naturally to everyone, but not everyone gets symptoms.
There's basically two ages where it can happen and it depends also on the location of the
problem.
It first starts in the early 20s in the lower back when you can get disc herniations or
back pain as the discs naturally wear out and degenerate.
And then can occur in the lower back in the 50s and 60s when you develop further arthritis
in the facet joints, which are prepared joints in the back of the spine.
And then you can begin to get back pain again, buttock pain or weakness or numbness in your
legs.
It can have a genetic component.
There are tendencies in different families to have back problems, probably related to
conditions that we don't understand, but then also their anatomy.
So there's a spectrum of space for the nerves in the back and some people have more space
than others.
There's a spectrum of symptoms and it can range from a backache that is short lasting
and maybe a few days a week or so, to leg symptoms such as sciatica, pain, numbness,
tingling or weakness down your legs or arms.
There are some conditions in the back where if left untreated the pain will worsen over
time.
Those conditions can be treated with medical management, including exercise, medications,
sometimes shots, and in extreme cases, surgery.
To generate spine conditions, we're diagnosed first with taking a careful history, talking
to the patient and doing a physical examination to determine if there are any physical signs
of the condition that you have to be aware of.
It can spread to other parts of the spine as they develop arthritis.
Fortunately, most of the time the symptoms are short lived, either on their own or with
physical therapy and over the counter anti-inflammatory medications or other types of pain medications.
Occasionally it requires more advanced treatment.
Dysdegeneration is a normal part of the human condition.
When it puts pressure on nerves and the nerves develop symptoms such as numbness or tingling
or weakness or pain, it can cause permanent symptoms.
Non-surgical treatments that are used to treat degenerative spine include physical therapy,
which is the mainstay of treatment, and this usually involves a home exercise program.
Anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen or motrin or a leave are also used, and occasionally
prescription medications will be needed too.
Surgical procedures really depend upon the type of problem that you're having.
If you're having leg pain or arm pain and it's due to pressure on a nerve, procedures
can be performed to take the pressure off that nerve and relieve the symptoms.
In some instances, a fusion is necessary to treat either instability, too much motion
in the back that either exists and is causing the symptoms or is created in the course of
the operation or in rare occasions to treat the back pain or neck pain itself.
Covering is a process of getting better.
First after surgery there is pain associated with the operation itself.
That is treated with pain medications, but then also goes pretty rapidly away on its
own.
There's physical therapy to get your mobility back and your strength back in your body,
and then there's a general recovery process after that.
We're in the early phases of looking at ways to prevent or reverse arthritic changes in
joints and in the back.
This is being done in an experimental level in our lab and some clinical trials are also underway.
Thank you very much, Doc.
It's very soft and tender.
I like it very much.
It has its own position in sleeping,
but it has an effect on sleeping.
In our gulugod, it's strong,
it's soft and light.
It should be perfect for the kind of kutsun you use.
Kutsun is soft,
it's delicious,
and it's safe to sleep.
But wait, guys.
Is it right to use a kutsun
if you have a pain in the gulugod
so that you can see the gulugod,
the legs, the arms, and the back.
How much is it?
You can feel it when you're sleeping
because in the gulugod,
especially in the gulugod,
if you're using a kutsun,
the gulugod is not right.
According to the expert,
in sleeping,
the reason for the lack of legs
or stiff neck is that
when you have a side view
and the implication of this
in our gulugod and in sleeping,
when the gulugod are moving
or moving,
it causes pain in the gulugod
or in the gulugod.
If you buy a kutsun,
test it,
try it,
so that you can know
if the back is tight
and the gulugod is just right.
The gulugod has a big effect
so that the natural
curved back will last.
In our lower back,
we call it
natural lordosis,
the curved back.
If our gulugod
is too tight,
the lordosis will disappear
and our back will hurt.
But if the gulugod
is too soft,
our back will also bend
and in the softness
of our kutsun or gulugod,
the back will also hurt.
It also depends on the position of the gulugod,
the choice of kutsun.
Therefore,
it is important to choose a kutsun
according to the need of a person.
In a furniture shop in Kinta,
the staff knows the right kutsun
for their customers.
In addition to what they are selling,
it is the Premium Memory
or Foam Spring Mattress.
Premium Latex Spring Mattress
and Flex Foam.
Loading City is the weight
of foam that we use
for forming latex foam.
So the more Loading City,
sometimes you will feel that
it is not that heavy.
Normally, that is the recommended for
the back problem.
We have a premium latex foam.
It has an excellent air circulation.
It is not that hot.
It also balances your room temperature.
Based on studies,
it is better to have a position
for sleeping.
First, there is a place
where you can see clouds or clouds.
In this position,
it is better to have an alignment
between the clouds,
clouds and clouds.
Also, choose the right
soft and firm kutsun
so that our clouds
can spread well.
It is great.
We are really different in our positions.
As far as I am concerned,
I want to have a place
for sleeping latex foam.
What do you want?
To have a place for sleeping latex foam.
I want to have a place for sleeping,
because it is better to have a place for sleeping latex foam.
I do not know how to say.
I am sure that if the problem is
that it is difficult for you to sleep latex foam
then you will not be able
to have a place for sleeping latex foam.
It is a good idea to have a position
for sleeping latex foam
so that our clouds do not spread
out.
That is why you should
use a good posture.
It is not cheap.
It is good.
It is good.
It is cheap but good.
you
Hi it's Dr. Caner here with Jeff and Jeff's down from Toronto and had some issues that
hopefully we've got resolved so tell us real quick what the problem was.
I had a lot of nerve pain shooting down my leg all from my lower back for months and months
so it came down here to get it fixed up.
How bad was it?
Well it came in here in a wheelchair, barely could fly down here. It was a lot of pain at the end.
So Jeff had really severe lumbar stenosis. He had disc herniations and also on top of the disc
herniations he had a number of joints in his back that were expanding and really just crushing the
nerves. So what we did is we used an ultrasonic tool essentially to resurface the inside of his
spinal canal. The traditional approach would be do full laminectomies where you take the
normal structures out and in this case we were able to go inside the spine just remove the junk,
take the bad stuff out and leave all the good stuff. What that essentially does is it allows us
to take the pressure off the nerves and leave everything that's supposed to be there intact.
So structurally his back is still as good as it's supposed to be. No laminectomies, no changes in
attention band structures that normally hold your spine up. So how do you how do you're a week out
of surgery now? How do you feel? Like a million bucks. Much better. Oh yeah. Leg pain's gone.
How much back pain do you have? Not a lot. A little stiffness when I sit down for an hour or so,
but it goes away and it's really good. So using these new ultrasonic tools we're able to do a much
less aggressive operation where we don't have to do traditional laminectomies anymore.
Dig advantage to patients. Huge advantage as far as not damaging normal structures.
Wear and tear or so-called degenerative changes of the spine can occur in a
variety of locations, most commonly in the neck and low back regions. It can
cause a variety of symptoms ranging from back or neck pain to arm and leg pain
and sometimes even be associated with neurologic deficits such as numbness
and or weakness. Initial management of such conditions involves initial trials
of nonoperative care. These can include anything from physical therapy, traction
to a trial of injection. It's only when these nonoperative measures fail that
surgery can at times become a reasonable option for patients. In the neck, the
degenerative changes such as a disc herniation can occur over a single level
or over several levels. They can also vary in severity and also in location. If a
disc herniation occurs centrally in the neck or cervical region, it can cause
pressure on the spinal cord. This in turn can cause either arm or leg symptoms
ranging from weakness to incoordination to gait imbalance. If a disc herniation
occurs on the side either on the right or the left, it can cause arm symptoms on
that particular side. This can also range in nature from pain to numbness to
weakness. Treatment is tailored to the specific scenario depending on the
duration of symptoms, the severity of symptoms and the imaging findings. Wear
and tear related changes occur most commonly in the lower back area involving
the lumbar spine. These changes can include wear on the discs, the joints
and the ligaments supporting the integrity of the spine. A disc herniation
as is shown here can occur for instance on one side. In this situation we would
often see back pain with associated leg pain. In more severe cases there can
also be associated numbness and or weakness involving that side. At Ohio
State we particularly specialize in treating complex spinal disorders. These
can involve a variety of deformities of the spine. Broadly speaking a deformity
involves a abnormal curvature of the spine either in the neck thoracic or
lumbar areas. Depending on the nature and severity of the symptoms and the
imaging findings a tailored treatment program is initiated often initially
involving non-operative measures such as physical therapy and injections. In
cases that do not respond to such measures surgical intervention is offered
as an option.
Your neck hurts. Your upper back is sore. You can't get your arm fully overhead. Your
shoulder is painful. You've tried massage, not helpful. You've rolled and smashed
for hours and no change. Maybe you have even tried some simple solutions such as
ice or heat, but it doesn't seem to make a difference. What's going on everybody?
Welcome to E3 Rehab. I'm Dr. Tony Camilla and today we're going to be talking
about the thoracic spine. Exercises targeting thoracic spine mobility, like
the exercise I'm doing right now, is going to be really important. Not only if
we're experiencing pain, like the examples I've provided in the beginning of
the video, but also for sport and performance. Improving our overhead
lifts, getting better at playing tennis, throwing a baseball, or even hitting a
golf ball further, just like this guy. Now there are a lot of exercises to choose
from, but don't worry, we got you covered with our four favorite thoracic
mobility drills. But first, a little bit of background info. The thoracic spine is
made up of 12 segments located just below our neck and above our lower back. It is
responsible for helping us flex, extend, rotate and twist, and also bend side to
side. It also contributes a good amount to our neck movement. When we look up or
down, we get about one third of that movement from our thoracic spine and a
bit less when we rotate left and right or bend our head side to side. So if you
woke up with a stiff neck or feeling a bit tight in your back after a long day at
work, simply adding some movement to the thoracic spine is going to be extremely
beneficial. Now when it comes to the shoulder, thoracic mobility is also
really important, as it can help improve overall range of motion, as well as
reduce the experience of discomfort. Directly improving thoracic extension has
shown to result in increased ranges of shoulder flexion, abduction and external
rotation mobility. This will have a huge carryover if you are looking to achieve
better positions with various lifts at the gym, looking to improve performance in
your sport, or even just to maximize your function for daily life. So does this
mean that a rounded back, thoracic kyphosis, or a slouch posture like this is
bad? Not exactly. We do know that these positions limit shoulder motion. However,
it actually hasn't been shown to be strongly correlated with pain. Rather,
what we do know is that by demonstrating proficient movement in our
thoracic spine, it does a really good job of altering stresses around the
shoulder. Now if you're someone experiencing shoulder discomfort and
looking for guidance on management, we have created this incredible program to
help you out. In this program, you're going to find a good amount of thoracic
mobility drills. This program is titled shoulder impingement, and for more
information, you can check the description box below. Okay, so now you know why
thoracic mobility is so important, but how do we go about improving it? Here are
our four favorite exercises for improving thoracic spine mobility.
you
you
If you're looking for more ways to improve your thoracic spine mobility,
check out these playlists from our other YouTube library, where we have over 50
options to choose from. We appreciate you guys watching. If you haven't already,
subscribe to our channel and leave us a like. That's it for today. Now go out and
improve that thoracic spine mobility. See you guys next time.
The spine is designed very efficiently when it comes to the amount of space it uses to
accomplish its job.
The spinal cord and thousands of nerves that attach to it fit tightly in the spaces between
the bones which make up the spine.
So when there is unexpected cell growth in the area because of a tumor, it can be very
disruptive.
Systems of spinal tumors are similar to stenosis.
Patients will come in with a variety of nerve-related complaints, typically weakness or pain radiating
into a limb or numbness in an area of the limb.
This may or may not be associated with back pain.
Typically when it is associated with back pain, it makes it easier to find.
We would get a CAT scan or an MRI and usually make the diagnosis of a spinal tumor.
These are quite rare though.
Common options for spinal tumors are typically surgical.
When the spinal tumor is large enough or in an area that is causing significant neurologic
deficit or pain, weakness, numbness, tingling, and extremity, then we typically excise the
tumor or make room for the tumor and that may be followed up with, depending on the tumor
type, radiation therapy or chemotherapy, to shrink the tumor and alleviate symptoms.
When someone has a spinal injury, the greatest risk is their spinal cord may be temporarily
or permanently damaged.
If a casualty has suffered an abnormal force to the neck or back and is complaining of
changes in sensation or difficulty in moving, they could have a spinal injury.
You must take care not to unnecessarily move their head, neck or spine.
Some of the following incidents could indicate a possible spinal injury.
They could have fallen from a height, such as from a ladder, fallen awkwardly when doing
gymnastics, from diving into a shallow pool and hitting the bottom, a collapsed rugby
scrum, fallen awkwardly from a horse or motorbike, they could have experienced sudden de-acceleration
in a car, had an injury to the head or face, or had a heavy object fall across their back.
If you suspect someone has a spinal injury, there are several key things to look for.
They may have pain in their neck or back where the injury occurred, have bruising and tenderness
in the skin over the spine, an irregular twist in the normal curve of the spine, have breathing
difficulties, loss of bladder and or bowel control.
They may lose control of their limbs, may lose sensation or have abnormal sensations
such as tingling or burning, or their limbs feel stiff, heavy or clumsy.
If you think they have a spinal injury, reassure the casualty and advise them not to move.
Call 999 or 112 for emergency help.
You should then kneel or lie behind the casualty's head, rest your elbows on the ground or on
your knees to help keep your arms steady.
Hold each side of their head with your fingers spread so their ears are not covered and they
can still hear you.
Support their head in this position so their head, neck and spine are aligned.
While you support their head, ask a helper to place rolled up blankets, towels or clothes
on either side of the casualty's head.
Make sure you continue to hold this position until emergency help arrives.
Do not move the casualty from the position that you have found them in unless they are
in immediate danger and it's safe for you to do so.
Honour to their level of response until help arrives.
If they become unresponsive at any point, prepare to treat an unresponsive casualty.
So remember, if you suspect a spinal injury, reassure them and call 999 or 112.
Don't move them.
Support their head and neck until help arrives.
And that's how you help someone with a spinal injury.
If this video has been helpful to you, help support St John Ambulance by going to
shai.org.uk forward slash donate.
Hello, in this video we're going to talk about the oncological emergency spinal cord compression.
Spinal cord compression, more specifically metastatic spinal cord compression, is one
of the omnias causes of back pain, where there is a compression of the fecal sac and its
components by tumor mass.
The spinal cord is the continuation of the brain and brainstem, which all make up your
central nervous system.
It is surrounded and protected by the vertebrae, the bones.
The spinal cord ends at about the L2 vertebral level, where it has fibers continuing down
called the core equana, or the horse's tail.
Making up the spinal cord are many nerve fibers, relaying motor information down to the periphery,
and sensory information from the periphery up to the brain.
Spinal nerve roots emerge from either side of the spinal cord, giving rise to the spinal
nerves.
For example, here is a superior view of the thoracic spinal cord.
It has a thoracic spinal root emerging, giving rise to the spinal nerves on either side.
The spinal nerves contain the sensory and motor nerve fibers.
Because of its delicate, important nature, the spinal cord is first protected by the
vertebrae, the bone, and then also further protected by the meninges, made up of three
layers.
The innermost meningeal layer is the Pia matta, then you have the arachnoid matta, and then
the dura matta.
Above the dura matta is what's called the epijural space.
We can find the venous plexus here, which drains blood from the spinal cord, as well
as this area contains fat and arteries, which supply the spinal cord with blood.
Separating the arachnoid matta and the Pia matta is the cerebrospinal fluid.
Separating the arachnoid matta and the Pia matta is the cerebrospinal fluid.
The spinal cord is protected in this sac, filled with cerebrospinal fluid, which we
can call the dural sac or the thecal sac, because the dural matta is the most outer
meningeal layer.
Let's look at it at a different plane, a median plane.
Here you can see the terminal portion of the spinal cord at the L2 vertebral level, known
as the conus medullaris.
The spinal cord is protected by the vertebrae, the bone, and further protected by the meninges,
made up of three layers.
The innermost layer is the Pia matta, then the arachnoid matta, then the dural matta.
Separating the arachnoid matta and the Pia matta is the cerebrospinal fluid.
The spinal dural is composed of a single layer and serves as the innermost barrier of the
thecal sac.
You can imagine the spinal cord sitting in the sac with this illustration.
It's the same sort of principle.
The epidural space contains the venous plexus, fat and other blood vessels, and lies between
the spinal dural and the bony ring.
Spinal cord compression develops in approximately 2.5% of patients with metastatic cancer, and
may be the first presentation of someone with cancer.
Metastatic cancer, of course, originates from a primary source, primary tumor, and this
could be the lungs or the breast, for example.
So these cancers will metastasize into the spine.
Metastatic tumors in the osseous vertebral columns account for 85% of cases of spinal
cord compression.
As tumor grows in the epidural space, it generally takes the path of least resistance and encircles
and compresses the thecal sac.
As the epidural venous plexus becomes obstructed, basogenic edema may develop in the white matter,
and eventually the gray matter of the spinal cord, and this will eventually lead to spinal
cord infarction.
Another mechanism of spinal cord compression is through destruction of the cortical bone,
resulting in vertebral body collapse, with displacement of bone fragments into the epidural
space, which can thus compress the thecal sac.
Another mechanism is paraspinal tumors or para aortic nodal masses may invade the spinal
cord through the neural foramen, causing spinal cord compression.
Intramedullary metastasis can produce internal compression of the spinal cord, and thus spinal
cord compression.
The primary tumors that are mostly involved with the spinal cord compressions and metastasis
to the spine include lung cancers, breast cancers, prostate and lymphoma.
Most frequently the vertebral bodies become involved by hematogenous spread.
Primary bone tumors such as multiple myeloma and osteogenic sarcoma may also lead to spinal
cord compression.
Spinal cord compression has a propensity for certain regions of the spine.
The most common level of spinal cord compression is in the thoracic spine, between 60-80%, and
this is followed by the lumbar spine, roughly 25%, and then the cervical spine.
Multiple spinal levels are involved in up to 50% of patients with metastatic cancer to
the bones.
If the pressure on the spinal cord is not relieved quickly, it may result in irreversible
loss of neurologic function.
The most important prognostic factor for functional outcome is neurologic function before treatment.
Hence any delay could result in poorer functional outcome and decreased quality of life, with
increased dependence on health care resources.
Majority of patients will have symptoms of back pain weeks before neurological symptoms
come up, and the back pain is usually worse with recumbency.
60% will have symptoms of weakness on presentation.
Radicular pain, which may develop due to nerve root compression by the tumor or secondary
tuber tubal collapse, may occur.
Other features include sensory changes and urinary and bowel dysfunction.
Spinal cord compression is an oncological emergency.
MRI should be performed in suspected individuals for acute diagnosis.
This is whole spine and even brain MRI.
Spinal cord compression needs to be treated immediately with steroids and this is followed
by radiation therapy, which aims to decompress the spinal cord and nerve root via a cytoreduction
of tumors, prevention of progressive neurologic symptoms, pain relief, and durable local control.
Surgery is another option if radiation fails.
Surgery is also useful to relieve pressure within the area through decompression.
When neurological status is the most important predictor of outcome in patients with spinal
cord compression, ambulatory patients tend to remain ambulatory, whereas non-ambulatory
patients typically do not regain the ability to walk.
Thank you for watching this video.
In summary, spinal cord compression is an oncological emergency.
MRI needs to be ordered right away and commencement of steroids to reduce edema is recommended.
Thank you for watching this video.
Spinal fractures are breaks or cracks of one or more bones that make up the spinal column.
These are also called vertebral fractures.
There are several types of spinal fractures.
Minor fractures occur when the posterior portion of the vertebrae has broken or cracked.
Major spinal fractures occur in the anterior part of the vertebrae.
Spinal fractures may be stable or unstable.
Stable fractures do not usually cause neurological problems or spinal deformities.
Unstable fractures, however, can result in these complications.
The spine is made up of 33 individual bones called vertebrae.
The vertebrae are numbered and divided into four regions.
A typical vertebra consists of a body and a vertebra large, which has several processes
for articular and muscular attachments.
The spinal nerves branch off your spinal cord in pairs and travel through small openings
between your vertebrae called the intervertebral foramina.
Did you see her spine decompress?
Hey guys, today we're gonna be talking
about spinal traction hanging from a pull-up bar.
Is this right for your back
in helping you fix low back pain?
No doubt for some people,
traction treatment can help relieve back pain.
But for others, it can be the exact opposite
of what we want to do.
Like for Stephanie, you can drop on down.
How does your back feel with that?
It hurts.
It hurts more.
So today guys, we're gonna tackle the truth
about what spinal decompression
and traction treatment actually does.
If it's right for you,
and if it's not, what you should do instead.
Get up and get down, get up and get down.
So traction treatment has been hailed
as a game changer for fixing low back pain.
Sometimes providing immediate relief for some
in helping people with chronic low back pain
relieve their symptoms for good.
But is it right for everyone?
Well, let's first start by just understanding
what does traction treatment or decompression,
what does it actually do to the spine?
Well, what it does is create a traction pull.
So if it's pulling up here and down here,
we're pulling the spine apart slightly.
Now what that does is actually help the disc
suck in some fluid content
and it can help elongate your spine
just slightly a few centimeters sometimes.
Now here's the deal.
This only occurs and lasts for a little bit of time.
So when you jump off that pull up bar,
you may actually be a slight bit taller,
but it's probably only going to last a few minutes.
You start walking around again.
The spine's gonna go back to its normal height.
Now, who is this correct for?
Well, for some people, usually my older athletes,
maybe my 60, 70 year old patients,
or people who lift weights
and maybe can't get through a very long workout
without their back tightening up a lot,
this may actually help provide a little bit of relief
to their backs.
People that maybe can only walk for so many minutes
without their back hurting.
Traction treatment may be helpful for them,
but it's not right for everyone.
Let me show you someone it's not right for.
So Stephanie, I'm gonna have you
jump on this bed right here.
This is a test that I perform on my patients
called a prone instability test.
I'm gonna have her lay over the edge of the bed
and she's going to relax her back muscles
as much as possible.
Legs are just hanging over the bed like this.
Now, from right here, I apply a shear load
to different parts of her spine.
So I start down low,
we apply a little bit of a shearing load,
then we go up to the next one,
just pushing on the different segments
and eventually, yep, right there.
We found one.
If you saw, she almost jumped off the bed.
So at that particular segment,
I pushed down and it created a little bit of shear load
and that hurt pretty good, correct?
Now, all I'm going to do,
let's find that spot one more time,
about right there, okay?
I'm gonna have you pick your legs off the bed.
Okay, now right here, I'm going to push down again.
How's that feel?
No pain.
No pain.
Stephanie has what's called an instability.
So if you look at this disc designs model right here,
this particular segment has a little bit more motion
than the other ones.
That's called an instability.
And whenever you have those micro movements
that trigger your pain,
that shows that hanging from a pull-up bar
and decompressing your spine,
actually is creating more motion
at that part of your spine in triggering symptoms.
So for you, doing decompression hangs
would actually be the worst thing for your back.
So what do we do in that case?
Your spine needs stability.
Now, a lot of times people will want to do
decompression hangs or spinal traction treatments
because their back feels stiff.
So here's two things that I want you to do instead of hanging.
The first one is called a cat camel.
Now what we're gonna do right here is pull up this way.
So you're gonna arch your back here
and then go down nice and slow.
And what we're doing is we're moving the spine
through a range of motion into flexion
and into extension, nice and slow,
going about three seconds through each cycle.
And something like this,
we're not pushing hard into entry.
So this is not a stretch.
This is a light mobility movement for the spine.
And technically this is also giving us
a little bit of nerve glide.
So for some people that have nerve-like symptoms,
this can be helpful.
But all I want to do with this is six to eight cycles,
no more than that.
And for a lot of people that have a lot of back stiffness,
this can be helpful at alleviating some of those symptoms.
And especially if you have instability,
like I showed right here, this would be a better option.
After doing some cat camels,
for someone who has instability,
obviously rather than doing traction,
we wanna work on spine stiffness and stability.
So how do we work on that?
We learn how to properly brace
while we do things throughout the day.
So what I would have her do is just put her fingers
into her stomach and she is going to breathe and brace
in a way that pushes her hands laterally.
So from right here, very good, push them to the side.
Let's do that one more time.
So relax, so I can push the hands in
and then engage your abs, pushes the hands out to the side.
Now that bracing technique she is going to then do
whenever she performs any type of hinging motion.
So whether she's coming over to pick up a weight
off the ground, so let's come over and just demonstrate that.
Before she starts, she's going to brace
and then move about her hips to pick up the weight.
Things like that will add up over time
because she's able to keep her spine
in a more stable position rather than how most people
would just lack it, basically bend over and come back,
moving their spine under load.
That's often what's creating these symptoms
culminating over time.
So the more you can keep your spine stable
and move about your hips for someone with spine instability,
the more you can wind down symptoms
and have more pain-free days.
So there we go.
So the big thing guys is to understand
that there is no one size fits all
when it comes to fixing back pain.
There is no shortage of videos circulating
around social media today of people that are hanging
and finding some relief for their back pain
or saying that it's the best way
to find relief for their back pain.
If you're someone who hangs from a pull-up bar
and gets more pain after, or you're likely someone
that is rolling over in bed and having some back pain
or bending over and feeling a quick shot of pain,
you're the person that likely has more
of an unstable spine and you would benefit
from instead of hanging from a pull-up bar
doing a cat camel drill and doing some spine stability drills
and just making sure that you're moving about your hips.
So I hope you guys liked today's quick video
on whether or not you should be using spinal traction
decompression to fix your back pain
and hopefully we'll be on the right track
for fixing your pain and getting back
to doing everything you want to do.
Until next time guys, happy squatting.
They say that energy flows where attention goes
so I pay no mind, I waste my time
with all these negative cats scratching
so caught up in their egos, these people of love.
So now I'm going to perform a quick screen for your neck, okay?
Go ahead and tuck your chin down to your chest.
Any symptoms with that?
No.
Now look up to the ceiling.
Any symptoms with that?
No.
And look forward at me.
Now touch your ear to your shoulder.
Any symptoms with that?
No.
And then other ear to opposite shoulder.
Any symptoms with that?
No.
Now look around to your left.
Any symptoms with that?
No.
And look around to your right.
Any symptoms with that?
No.
Okay.
So now I'm going to perform a quick examination and you just tell me if you have any symptoms
with this.
Go ahead, we'll look up, side bend over and rotate around and hold right there.
Any symptoms with this?
No.
What if I add downward pressure?
Any symptoms with that?
No.
Okay.
Now look forward.
We're going to repeat on the other side.
Go ahead and look up, side bend over and rotate around and hold right there.
Any symptoms with that?
No.
What about with downward pressure?
No.
Okay.
And look forward.
Okay.
So now I'm going to examine some of your strength.
So go ahead and shrug those shoulders up to your ears and hold right there.
Good.
And relax down.
Now elbows out to your side.
Hold here.
Don't let me move you.
Good.
Now elbows down and hands up to your shoulders.
Hold there.
Don't let me move you.
Good.
Now push out.
Try and straighten your arms.
Good.
Now have your hands down.
Thumbs up.
Hold right there.
Don't let me move you.
Good.
Now fingers out.
Hold there.
Don't let me move you.
Good.
Okay.
Now go ahead and turn your palms up and hold right here.
I'm going to check your sensation.
You just tell me if they feel same side to side.
Right here?
Feels okay.
Okay.
Do these feel the same?
Yes.
Do these feel the same?
Yes.
Do these feel the same?
Yes.
Do these feel the same?
Yes.
And do these feel the same?
Yes.
Okay.
Now I'm going to check your reflexes.
So go ahead and relax.
Go ahead and relax this right arm.
Good.
Good.
And we're done.
There was a plant hanging there. Who would have thought watering a house
plant would result in a fractured spine? Certainly not Dorothy Eastwood. All I did
was reach up. I was gonna take it down to water it and I felt something in my
back. It's like something grabbed the base of my spine. The resulting pain
was constant and unbearable. Lying down, sitting up, walking, it was just there all
the time and it drove me pretty much to tears and believe me I'm not one that
it just lies down and cry very often. For years the go-to options for spinal
fractures were pain medications or an open surgery but now doctors have a
procedure that fits in between the two. Dr. Paul Fuchs is Dorothy's doctor. The
previous treatments weren't ideal and now that kyphoplasty has been developed
it's one way that we can stabilize the fracture which is what we want to do
and it's more of an internal stabilization of the fracture. Here's how it
works. Once the spot is identified on live x-ray surgeons make an incision
about the size of a fingernail and insert a hollow needle creating a pathway to
the fracture. An orthopedic balloon is inside the needle. When it's inflated it
compresses the break. You can see the balloon now blown up and that's again
compacting the bone. The balloon comes out then a semi-liquid cement goes in
through the same needle and fills the void. It takes four or five minutes for
that cement to harden and once it hardens the fracture essentially is healed.
Kyphoplasty is performed under general anesthesia or conscious sedation. The
pain relief is significant and the patients traditionally can go home that
day. With her fractured spine fixed Dorothy is getting back to her daily
duties. I was always a very active person I was working until this happened so I
wasn't really ready to just sit around. For Lee Memorial Health System I'm Amy
Osher.
The most typical symptom of spine tumors is pain, very often it causes pain just from
its very presence in the bone or from destruction of the bone.
Other symptoms are often neurological, so the effect on the spinal cord or nerve roots
can lead to weakness, numbness, tingling, inability to walk, those sorts of problems
can emerge as well.
The classic pain associated with cancer-related bone pain is pain that happens at night and
also pain that's not relieved by rest, which is different from the kind of pain we get
in our back from or degenerative conditions or strains, which is usually pain that's
worse during the day or with activity.
Certainly if you have known cancer and you're experiencing significant pain anywhere in
your spine, you should consult your doctor right away.
Having back pain that everyone experiences at some point in their life is very, very
unlikely to be cancer or any other dangerous condition.
Nevertheless, any pain that is severe and intolerable or pain that lasts longer than
six weeks, you should consult your primary care doctor for a further evaluation, although
again it's unlikely to be anything very dangerous.
Sinovial spinal cyst Sinovial cyst of the spine is an interesting
topic.
Basically, you need to cognize it is a Sinovial cyst and you need to cognize the treatment
is probably removed by some sort of decompression and you may need fusion if there is instability.
It occurs due to arthritis of the facets.
It occurs mostly in patients 6 years or older.
The effect is 4-5, this is one of the most active levels, it will be bulging of the lining
of the covering of the facet joint.
The Sinovial cyst is a cyst or a fluid filled cavity.
Here you see the facet joint and the lining Sinovial tissue in the joint.
Now you can see the fluid build up in the facet joint and the cyst.
When the fluid escapes from the arthritic facet because it is under pressure, it dilates
the capsule of the facet joint and creates a cyst.
The connection between the cyst and the facet becomes obvious.
The cyst is rolled off from the spinal canal.
It causes pressure on the nerve root as it tries to exit the framing, compare both sides.
The cyst acts like a herniated disc.
The patient will have low back pain, numbness and radiation of the pain down the leg.
It is best diagnosed by an MRI.
The MRI can also diagnose the pressure on the nerve root by the cyst.
The cyst is right in T2 because it is a fluid filled mass, it is not like a disc and the
cyst is contiguous with the hypertrophied facet joint which also has a high signal intensity.
The Sinovial cyst indicates a facet pathology.
The patient will be initially treated conservatively.
It is a high recurrence rate with non-surgical treatment and if there is no improvement then
you need to do surgery.
So what is the best procedure for the pain?
If the patient has a dichrobaty alone then you would do decompression.
If the patient has significant low back pain due to spinal instability you would do decompression
and fusion.
You need to check for associated instability.
How do you know that you have spinal instability?
Look at MRI or look at the x-rays or get flexion extension x-rays before you decide on the
surgical intervention.
So basically because you have the Sinovial cyst when you go in and you remove it and
then you have hypertrophy of the facets and the ligament and phlegm so you will do hemilaminatomy
and partial facetectomy with direct decompression of the neural elements and you will do fusion
if there is instability.
Thank you very much, I hope that was helpful.
Welcome back to anatomy and physiology on Catalyst University.
My name is Kevin Tocoff.
Please make sure to like this video and subscribe to my channel for future videos and notifications.
In this video, we're going to talk extensively about the vertebral ligaments, which are going
to be ligaments that connect various pieces of the spine together, and overall produce
a stabilizing effect on the spine.
One thing that you don't want is you wouldn't want your spine consistently flapping around
and being all loose and all that and looking like the wacky, waving, inflatable, arm flailing
tube man from Family Guide.
You don't want that.
You want your spine to be as stable as possible because that's going to help, first of all,
carry all the weight that you normally have to carry around through walking and standing.
But especially if you go to the gym and you have to lift something, put a heavy load
on your back or your spine, this is going to help with that.
So we need the spine to be stable.
And here we're going to talk about many of these ligaments.
So let's look over here first on the right.
We have a bunch of lumbar vertebra stacked on top of one another.
Of course, over here on the right side of this image, this is anterior, and we know
that because this is the vertebral body.
Over here is posterior because these are the spinous processes.
Now one thing I want to first mention is that if we look between the vertebral bodies, we
have the intervertebral disc.
We're actually going to dissect that in a little bit.
That's actually the last thing we're going to do.
Turns out that the intervertebral disc has several parts, and we're going to look at
those later.
But for now, let's actually look at the spinous processes.
If you look at the tips of these spinous processes, you'll notice there's this string-like ligament
that connects them.
This ligament that goes on the tips of the spinous processes, this is what's called the
super spinous ligament.
Super means on top of and spinous process.
The reason it's on top of the spinous processes is because if we look at a four-legged creature
like a cat, their spinous processes would be projected upward, and so this ligament would
sit on top of them, therefore super spinous.
Humans obviously stand upright, so ours is actually posterior or dorsal to the spinous
processes.
This is your super spinous ligament.
What's important to note about the super spinous ligament is that it only extends down from
the C7 spinous process.
It doesn't exist above the C7 spinous process, and to understand that, we need to look at
this picture.
Here we have the occiput.
This is part of the skull, of course, and right here on the occiput, we have the external
occipital protuberance.
If we follow that around to the base of the occiput, we see this sheet-like ligament, and
this is what's called the nuchal ligament, or the ligament in nukie, depending on what
source you're looking at.
I always call it the nuchal ligament, but it basically is the sheet that seems to be
connecting all of these spinous processes, and of course the posterior tubercle of C1,
connects them all the way down to C7.
Here's the C7 vertebrae right here.
Here's its spinous process, and the nuchal ligament extends all the way down there.
It's important to realize is that the super spinous ligament goes all the way down to
the sacrum, but as it goes up, it terminates at C7, and above C7, it exists as this sheet-like
ligament called the nuchal ligament.
In some ways, you could consider the nuchal ligament a superior extension of the super
spinous ligament.
Make sure you understand that the super spinous ligament, at least proper, only exists at
the C7 vertebrae and down to the sacrum.
Above that, it's the nuchal ligament, but those collectively are going to join the tips
of these spinous processes.
If we look between the lengths of the spinous processes, we have the interspinous ligaments.
For example, the inferior part of this spinous process is connected to the superior part
of the spinous process below it via this interspinous ligament.
These are segmental ligaments that pretty much exist all the way up the spine and down
to the sacrum, interspinous ligaments.
Then we have this ligament right here.
This is called a ligamentum flavum.
When you're referring to one of them, it's actually just ligamentum flavum.
Collectively, they're referred to as ligamenta flava.
That's the plural.
These actually connect the lamina of adjacent vertebrae.
For example, the lamina region of this vertebra above is connected to the lamina region of
the vertebra below by a ligamentum flavum.
When you stack these vertebra on top of one another, you actually create a vertebral canal,
which is where the spinal cord exists.
What you should notice is actually part of the ligamentum flavum of each segment actually
exists in the vertebral canal.
There's two structures right there that we already have.
We have the spinal cord and actually part of the ligamentum flavum.
We're going to see in a separate video that actually there's a mechanism to actually pull
the ligamentum flavum at each level posteriorly, at least in the lumbar spine.
That actually pulls this ligamentum flavum flat and actually increases the diameter of
the vertebral column as to prevent compression of the spinal cord, which can be important
if you're putting a big load on the spine like you would during a squat or a deadlift.
This can actually be pulled posteriorly and increase the diameter of the vertebral column.
We'll talk about that later.
If we look at the anterior surface of the vertebral body, we have the anterior longitudinal
ligament.
Here's actually an anterior view, so we can actually see it going around a big portion
of the periphery of the body.
Notice that it goes over the body of the vertebra and also the intervertebral disc.
This is the anterior longitudinal ligament.
This anterior longitudinal ligament at the base, the very bottom, it goes down to the
sacrum and then all the way up pretty much to the junction of C1 and C2.
There's a reason for that.
If we look at the anterior longitudinal ligament that exists between the occiput and C1, that
actually gets a different name.
It's actually called the anterior atlanooccipital membrane.
The portion of it between C1 and C2 is called the anterior atlantoaxial membrane.
Then below that, it's just the anterior longitudinal ligament.
The reason that up toward the top near the occiput that we give those different names
is because they're slightly different in structure.
Even though they're continuous with the anterior longitudinal ligament, they're a little bit
more membranous and less ligamentous, I guess you could say.
They're given different names, but they are continuations of that as they go up and attach
to the margin of the foramen magnum.
Notice that the anterior longitudinal ligament is quite wide.
It's also very strong.
In contrast, inside the vertebral canal, so on the posterior aspect of the vertebral
body and then also in the canal itself, we have the posterior longitudinal ligament.
This one is weaker than the anterior longitudinal ligament, and also you can see it's obviously
more narrow, it's narrower than the anterior part of this.
The posterior longitudinal ligament, even though it's thinner and weaker than the anterior
longitudinal ligament, it follows a similar pattern.
Down at the sacrum, it moves upward, and then once you get to the level of C1 to C2,
it changes its name.
In the occiput and the C1 to C2 region, it's referred to as the tectorial membrane.
And then once it gets down to C1 to C2, it becomes the posterior longitudinal ligament
all the way down to the sacrum.
And again, the reason up toward the top here, the occiput, that it changes names, is because
it's a little bit less ligamentous in nature and more membranous, so it becomes the tectorial
membrane.
These right here are the major ligaments that stabilize the spine.
There are a few other ones that we're going to see exclusively in the neck region that
really play a role in stabilizing the atlano-axial joint.
We'll talk about those in a separate video, but understand this, that these pretty much
exist throughout the entire spine and play a major role there for it.
Before we conclude this video, let's actually take a look at the intervertebral disc, and
we'll see a few regions of this that are very important.
So right here, we have two vertebral bodies that are stacked on top of one another, and
of course, the intervertebral disc is going to lie between those.
Now the intervertebral disc is composed of fibrocartilage.
Remember that fibrocartilage is the toughest type of cartilage.
It's very resistant to compression.
It's strong, and so you're going to need it anywhere where you have to have resistance
to compression.
Well, considering these are lumbar vertebrae, especially there, you have to support the
weight of every single vertebra on top of it, including all the tissue, the limbs, the
muscles, everything.
So this has to be pretty tough.
It couldn't be elastic or hyaline cartilage.
This is going to be a very tough kind of cartilage.
Now if we look at the regions of this, just right in contact with the bodies, not the
bulk of it, but just the region in contact with the bodies, those are going to be where
we have cartilage end plates.
The actual fibrocartilage region of the disc does not make contact with the body.
There's actually a very thin region right here.
You can actually kind of see it.
They've kind of distinguished it right here.
This is the cartilage end plate.
The cartilage end plate is composed of hyaline cartilage, but it just plays a role in anchoring
the fibrocartilage part indirectly to the body.
You have a cartilage end plate both on the superior part of the disc and the inferior
part.
Like I said, they actually play a role in anchoring the disc itself indirectly to the
body.
One thing I want to mention about the cartilage end plate is actually when you have a disc
rupture in the spine, the first structure to go, the weakest link in the chain, is the
cartilage end plate.
It's actually not the fibrocartilage part itself.
Cartilage end plate's the first part to give during a disc rupture.
Now what we're going to do is we're actually going to take this top vertebra off and take
a superior view of the disc.
What we're actually going to see is there's two regions.
We have an outer annulus fibrosis region and then the inner nucleus pulposis region.
In this picture right here, they appear to be two separate structures.
But actually what you would see is if you did a dissection of this in real life, there's
not really a clear cut distinguishing difference between these two regions.
It's actually more of a graded progression from annulus fibrosis to nucleus pulposis.
But for the most part, if you're talking about this nucleus pulposis or nucleus pulposis
like is going to be internal and then annulus fibrosis or annulus fibrosis like will be
external to that.
When we're talking about the annulus fibrosis, the densest regions of nerve endings are going
to be in the outer part of the annulus fibrosis, although all of these are actually supplied
with pain receptors or nociceptors.
Also it's important to realize that the disc itself is avascular.
It doesn't matter if we're talking about the annulus fibrosis, nucleus pulposis, or the
cartilage endplates.
They are avascular.
To get nutrients like oxygen and glucose and things like that, they're going to solely
rely on diffusion from neighboring blood vessels.
There are no blood vessels in the disc itself.
The other thing I wanted to mention before we conclude this, just a little piece here,
not really so much important for this video, is that remember when you have two vertebra
stacked on top of one another, you get the formation of this hole called the intervertebral
foreman.
Remember that the spinal cord is going to go down the column, which you can't see here,
but the spinal nerves exit left and right through the associated intervertebral foreman.
Please make sure to like this video and subscribe to my channel for future videos and notifications.
Thank you very much.
Right now, doctor, and we're looking at spine osteoarthritis, doctor.
That's correct.
Can you tell us what that is?
So basically here we have the spine.
What I'm seeing is the spine looking from the side view here.
So basically the belly will be sitting over here, okay, and the back portion or the back
muscle will be down here in the skin.
So basically we have in between, and the spine is being formed by the bones on the spine,
which are the squares that you guys see over here.
And in between we have this structures, which are called the disc.
The disc they serve as the execution in between the different segments.
As you can see, suppose you can see a normal one, how smooth it is, the levels, and how
irregular the levels become.
So normally what happens as we age, the disc they start losing some of the water content.
They will start losing some of the tensile strength to become weaker.
And so when they become weaker, some of the stress, normally keeping in mind that they
bear about 80% of the load of the spine, the rest is being transferred to those joints
that they were referring to in the clip, which are called the facet joints or the syncopophysiological
joints.
Those joints they then become arthritic instead of bearing about 20% of the load of the spine.
Now they're bearing more load.
So they become arthritic, they can develop some bone spurs, and normally when they develop
the bone spurs they normally develop over here.
And as you can see, this structure that is coming out here is called the nerve.
So if the disc starts narrowing, they start getting thinner, and some of the joints they
start ingrowing over here and causing some bone spurs, the nerve can get compressed.
And that's one of the reasons of people developing sciatica.
And when they get compressed, doctor, that's obviously where the pain occurs.
That's correct.
So typically, depending on the level, sometimes we might see this on a normal MRI, I mean,
on a given an MRI and the patient might be completely asymptomatic.
So that doesn't mean because you have those findings on an imaging, which we expect as
we age, that people are going to get the innovative changes as we age.
That is just like the gray hair.
But on some occasions, those findings can correlate with the symptomatology, and that's
basically up to the clinician just to figure it out and address those findings.
Bob and Brad, the two most famous physical therapists
on the internet.
Hi folks, I'm Bob Schrupp, physical therapist.
Brad Heineck, physical therapist.
Together we are the most famous physical therapists
on the internet.
In our opinion, of course, Bob.
Today we're gonna talk about three best stretches
to quickly remedy lumbar spinal stenosis
and avoid surgery.
That's right, Bob.
So who do we know, Brad, that's having trouble with this?
Well, Bob, yours truly happens, too.
By the way, this is not uncommon,
particularly with people past 50 years old,
and we'll get into that a little bit.
By the way, if you're new to our channel,
please take a second to subscribe to us.
We provide videos on how to stay healthy,
fit, pain-free, and we upload every day.
Do we know what we're giving away, by the way?
Someone tell us?
Go to bobandbrad.com.
What's?
Sleep of bed.
Wow, we're giving away a bed.
Go to bobandbrad.com.
Go to the giveaway section.
We're actually giving away an entire mattress.
That's right.
A sleep of patient mattress,
700 tiny mattresses in there.
Most comfortable mattress.
Brad, you can test it.
I certainly can.
You got back pain and you love it.
We both do.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, separate beds.
Yeah.
You can go to Facebook.
It'll also be pinned to the top of the page to contest.
Go to Twitter, Instagram, or TikTok
if you want a 60-second version of our program.
Watch this.
All right, so spinal stenosis,
in this case, lumbar.
So you can have stenosis throughout your whole spine.
Yeah, you can have it in your cervical neck.
And stenosis, technically, if you look at it,
it just means a narrowing of a hole.
The hole was like this.
Now it's like this.
So you can have stenosis of your arteries or your veins.
So we're talking about, we'll look at this.
I don't have my little pointer here.
But here, if we look at the spine,
we're talking about lumbar stenosis.
We're talking about the low back.
And if you look at spinal stenosis,
there's two areas of stenosis that can cause pain in your back
and going down into one or both of your legs.
And we look right here.
Can you zoom in on this, Tanner?
With this nerve, here we got a nerve coming up.
Peripheral nerve, we'll call that,
which does go down into your leg.
Now the gap right here is called the foramen.
That actually starts to close up.
It may be because your disc as the aging process
is deteriorating, which pretty much happens in everyone.
Or it could be some bony-
Overgrowth.
Overgrowth, calcification going.
One way or another, but the nerve gets pinched
because the hole that it goes through
becomes smaller or stenotic.
That can also happen with the spinal cord.
It's hard to show in here, but if you look at the-
Yeah, and a spinal canal, you can-
There you go, Bob.
That's right.
Right here, Brad, you can kinda show it.
There you go.
Yep, in here.
But it happens more often.
More, yeah.
When that happens, oftentimes the pain
or the symptoms will go down both legs.
One way or another, there is worst case scenario,
surgery that typically can help it out.
However, I found out after doing a little research
that most of the time, vast majority of times,
you don't need surgery.
So that's good news.
Because it can get inflamed,
and once the inflammation calms down,
it has enough room then.
But with the inflammation, there's not.
Right.
And also certain movements can be hard.
And that's what we're gonna do,
show you exercises that increase that gap
and make it even more a less chance yet of having surgery.
So we gotta get rid of the spine here.
I'm back now.
So let's go into, there's a five-question self-test
that you can take for this.
It doesn't, it's not a definitive test,
but it'll help give you a four of these answers
or yes, out of the five.
There's a pretty good chance you have stenosis.
Spinal stenosis.
Right.
The first one, if you have bilateral or pain
or symptoms down both of your legs,
if that's a yes, then you just put a yes down.
Right, you're definitely...
Well, there could be other things,
but yeah, as again, as always, combined number two,
if more leg pain, then back pain.
So if you got, and sometimes this leg pain
can just feel like a toothache, a numbness, a tingling,
all those symptoms.
If you have more down the leg, one leg or both legs,
and not so much up here, that's a yes.
If that's the case, you check that one off.
Number three, if pain gets better when you sit down.
And I've had a lot of patients, including myself,
boy, you sit down in within not hours,
but within a minute or so.
Oh, sometimes right away.
Number four.
You missed number three, Brad.
Pain with standing or walking.
Yeah, how could I miss that one?
Very typical people find when...
Standing straight.
Yep, standing up straight, or like if you're walking,
if you were shopping, you hold onto the grocery cart
and you find that leaning forward onto the cart
feels better.
That's a dead ringer there.
But I'll tell you, they call it shopping cart syndrome,
actually, because you actually feel better
when you're walking with the shopping cart.
And then, if you are older than 48,
now, we've had, Bob read something older than 55.
Whatever, if you get up into your 50s or older,
there's a more chance that you're gonna have to.
Yeah, I saw, if you're older than 55, and if you did this,
and you go up like this, and that would increase your pain,
that was spinal stenosis,
because you're closing up the gaps there.
So there's different information out there,
but of those five questions, if four of them are positive,
or yes, there's a fairly good chance you have stenosis.
So the other thing is, if you're having leg symptoms
on one or both legs, and it's sounding like stenosis,
and you're having problems with your balance,
or you've had a history of falls,
you need to go see a doctor.
Don't go through this and try and fix it.
You need to see, if you're falling,
figure out what's going on, and you have these symptoms,
get it checked out, and then maybe see a therapist
directly, because that's getting more serious.
So if you're having these symptoms,
but you feel functional, and you're sitting down
and it feels better, here's one of the stretches.
We've got three stretches to do.
These are relatively easy, particularly this first set.
You can do these in your bed before you get out of bed.
If you can lay down on a floor carpeted floor,
that's a good option as well.
The first one is just start with a single knee to the chest.
Oftentimes, if it's the right leg
that feels the pain going down just one leg,
that leg going up by itself may feel better.
In my case right now, oh yeah, that feels better.
Make sure you do both legs, and it may take both.
And we do suggest do both knees coming up,
because that helps open those gaps up on both sides.
You got anything more about this Bob?
No, that looks good to me.
You can hold this 15 to 30 seconds,
depending on how it feels, if it feels better
to get motion and go pressure on, pressure off,
10 repetitions is probably good.
Again, this should feel good though.
If this is causing increased pain, you're stopping.
Right, there's something else.
Or even increased pain afterwards.
Right, you do 10 and it feels okay
or a little bit better, but then you get up.
And it's actually worse.
And you're getting worse,
and over the next half hour, you flared it up.
Well, so yeah, be really aware of how things respond
after the exercise.
So, and if those help, and they stay good afterwards,
you can do those three times a day, I'd recommend.
Sure.
Possibly more, as long as it continues to feel good.
The next one, the six inch roll.
Now this one, I learned taking a continuing ed class.
It's got a foam roller.
Yep.
So this one, you need to do on a floor.
You're not gonna do it in your bed, for sure.
Yeah, you need it firm surface.
Yeah, carpeted floor.
I would not try it on a smooth floor.
You could do a rolled up towel that was rolled up tight.
Really?
Yeah.
But this, these work a lot better.
Now what you're gonna do with a foam roller,
it works better if it's a little bit softer.
They have a lower density,
but even a hard one, that's usually they're black in color.
They're a little more firm.
That'll work.
This is a little more comfortable.
You put it down below your belt line under the sacrum,
lower part of the sacrum,
not down in here where it feels like it's gonna fall off.
The sacrum is a triangle right about here.
Yep.
So that can kind of give you a little bit of a hint
of where the location is.
So you'll go like this and you'll know it's in the right spot
because it's gonna feel good for one thing.
And if it feels like it's fallen off like that,
you need to bring it in a little bit closer,
not much half inch or so.
And this, though what happens is a roll
kind of helps gap those facets or those frame in.
And if you push a little bit like this and roll it,
it actually, what I do is I'm gonna expose
a little bit of myself here.
I'm gonna go right on my skin
because it grabs a hold of the skin
and that actually feels good.
It kind of gaps, it pulls the frame in apart.
Almost like a little traction there.
Yep, exactly, right Bob?
Yep.
And you're gonna do that like right now,
this is feeling really good.
And I could do this for 30 seconds easily
until I get tired.
And you're gonna work with that for a few minutes,
do that a few times a day.
Now, this next exercise, number three,
is gonna take a little bit of, not especially equipment,
but a pull up bar,
where you're gonna use the hanging handles,
but a pull up bar of that
and you're gonna actually put some traction
through your back by hanging.
Nothing, this is no new science or anything,
it's been around for a long time.
There's one thing I've found,
I haven't seen this anywhere.
I haven't read this either.
But I know it works for me, so.
I thought this was a cool idea.
So first of all, if you have a pull up bar,
grab that, if you have hanging handles,
it works better yet.
It works good to be up against the wall.
Up against the wall, plus you can,
you know, if you have the hanging handles,
you keep your feet on the ground.
Yeah, you don't wanna have something,
you have to jump up to get.
So here, and then you slowly go down.
And you still can have some weight through the feet
if you want, and then if you want,
you can progress to no weight.
And yeah, assuming your shoulders tolerate this,
typically it's good for your shoulders
if you got, and that's a whole other topic
we've got videos on.
But I can actually do this,
but the key part about this
is you have to be able to relax your core muscles
because they're gonna allow the spine
to get that traction and open up those frames.
If they're tightening up,
you're not actually getting any traction.
Right, if you're going in your old tight,
it's not gonna work.
You can be, relax, let everything relax.
Now, what I've found is if I put my feet right here,
that actually lets me relax better
and it flexes the spine just like the previous exercise.
See what happens if you're hanging
and you're having to lift the legs,
those muscles are tightening up and pulling on the spine.
So this is relaxing the muscles of the legs
and relax the stomach and abdomen
and you can just let it hang.
It's a brilliant idea, Brad.
And I can do a little this
or I can go up to this level.
I at home, I've done it.
I don't have a stool like this.
Just make sure you got enough strength
to hold on that you don't end up falling.
Yeah, absolutely.
This is not one to do
if you're concerned about that at all.
You need to feel confident in hanging.
Hanging, right.
So I typically only hang 20 to 30 seconds at the most.
One of my fingers are starting to become tired.
I just, you know, I don't even try to push it.
So what are you gonna call it?
The Heineck Hanging Method?
Yeah, the Heineck Maneuver.
The Heineck Maneuver.
Not to be confused with the Heimlich Maneuver.
The Heineck Maneuver.
All right, there we go.
I do feel, it feels good now.
I got spondylolisthesis, by the way.
So that's why I have at this young age,
well, I guess I'm 58 now,
but I had this when I was younger.
Young age.
Well, you know, I'm trying to be optimistic, Bob.
I'm trying to find some dirt that says older humor.
So, why, Bob?
By the way, if you're new to our channel,
you gotta, oh, we did that part, yeah, I was gonna say.
Talk about it.
We can fix just about anything.
Except for broken heart.
That's right, Bob.
The hanging isn't gonna do a thing for it.
Thanks.
Be careful.
Hey, what's up guys?
I'm Dr. Aaron Horsig and today I'm going to show you how to improve your thoracic spine
mobility.
All right guys, thanks so much for stopping by the YouTube channel.
Today we're going to talk about stiff thoracic spine or mid-back.
Now I want to start off with why a stiff thoracic spine can be so bad for your barbell lifting
technique and performance.
I'm going to show you two simple ways that you can screen and uncover whether or not
this is a limitation, a weak link in your body and four different ways that you can
fix and improve your thoracic spine mobility.
So let's start off today with why could a stiff thoracic spine limit your technique
and performance.
Now, this is especially true for overhead lifting.
If when I put a barbell on my back, let's say I'm doing any overhead work.
Let's say I'm getting into a jerk position.
When I do that, there's a couple of things that have to happen.
I need your thoracic spine to be mobile enough to allow your shoulder blades to move correctly.
Now let's move this camera over to the side and I'm going to show you what happens.
If I don't have sufficient thoracic spine extension, what's going to happen is my lower
back is going to have to arch.
So from right here, if I have good thoracic spine extension and my mid-back is able to
extend enough, bar goes straight up.
Well if I don't, what's going to happen?
That low back is going to have to compensate in order for me to keep that bar here and
not from falling forward because often a stiff thoracic spine will allow this.
Obviously, it's a little bit more of an exaggeration, but it's going to be a rounding of that upper
back and not allowing enough upward rotation of your shoulder blades, which will not allow
your arms to get into a good position.
So if you have any desire to do jerks, presses overhead, snatches, any overhead lifting,
you need your thoracic spine to extend enough.
Here's just a simple demonstration.
At home, if you're watching this, round your shoulders, bring your body into a bad kyphotic
position.
Obviously, this is an overexaggeration.
Lift your arms as high as you can.
Obviously, you can only lift your arms so far.
Now stand up with good posture.
Don't arch your low back, keep your low back braced, but just stand up with good posture
and now raise your arms as high as you can.
You can notice how much further I can raise my arms overhead and all I did was go from
a slouched kyphotic position of my mid back to a good upright position so I gained thoracic
spine extension.
Now let's talk about how you could screen your body to uncover whether or not you have
a weak link or a problem in thoracic spine, rotation, mobility, extension.
What you're going to do is you're going to sit on the ground.
Here I have a tape of an X.
We are going to sit right in the middle of that X.
Now from here, what you're going to do is you're going to place this PVC pipe just across
your shoulders and you are going to then rotate as far as you can each way.
So you're going to rotate this way and then you're going to rotate this way.
Now you're going to see for whether or not that PVC pipe can go past that X and if you
have symmetry side to side.
So right here I'm going to rotate as far as I can.
Obviously you can see I can go past that amount and then we go to the same on the other side.
If you are not able to get to that position, it means you don't have sufficient thoracic
spine mobility rotating side to side and the way the thoracic spine works is that if you
can rotate sufficiently one way and the other, your spine can also extend and up.
It's the same mechanics side to side.
So we can expose issues in extension by finding problems and measuring problems in rotation.
So this is at least 45 degrees and you should be able to hit 45 degrees each way.
Now another way you can do this for all my physical therapists, athletic trainers, chiropractors
out there, this is often performed in quadruped.
So here's another way that you can test thoracic spine rotation.
You're going to sit into a position like this.
Your elbow is going to go in between your knees.
You're going to take your other hand and put it on your low back and then you're going
to try to keep your chest pinned down to your downside thigh and rotate as far as you can.
So here rotate up and back down and we're looking for whether or not you can open your
chest up to 45 degrees at least on each side and whether or not it's symmetrical.
If you can only do so much on one side and you have a lot more motion or a lot less motion
on the other side, that's an imbalance in the way your thoracic spine is moving, which
could lead to problems and technique in moving your arms overhead.
So again, this is what it's going to look like here.
Rotate up.
How far can I go and then back down.
Don't cheat and do this and raise your chest up because then you're getting also a lot
of that motion from the lumbar spine.
So here, how much can you go up and back down.
So if you found a problem in those positions, let's talk about how we can fix it.
Let's go back to the first exercise movement that I was doing with the foam roller.
Now this is a very simple mobilization tool for improving thoracic spine extension.
You're going to place that threat or that foam roller right underneath your shoulder
blades.
Okay, so it's going to be on your lower portion of your thoracic spine.
From here, we are going to brace our core, arms here, and you're going to slowly rock
back and forth overhead.
And what we're doing is we're mobilizing our thoracic spine into extension with our
arms overhead.
So that end position, that end game of what we're trying to improve.
Now from right here, you're just performing like tiny little sit-ups.
And then you can move to a next spot, tiny little sit-ups up and down, working on improving
that extension, the ability to go backwards like this.
Now, here's the common fault.
People will do this.
Where did I get all that motion from?
Just got it all from my low back.
So that is not helping me at all with that thoracic spine.
You want to make sure that you're just doing small little motions in feeling for whether
or not there's a segment that may feel a little stiff, like it's not moving very well.
Hang out on that spot for a little bit, maybe do 15 to 20 reps in each position, keeping
that core braced.
And then again, after every single one of these, go and retest.
Put your arms overhead.
See if you feel like you improved that at all.
Here's the next one.
Just grab that same foam roller, you're going to put it on the ground, we're going to do
the prayer stretch.
This is a similar pose, like in yoga, you're going to have your arms up and we're going
to let our chest drop as far as possible.
So this is what it's going to look like.
You're going to get your hands in that overhead position, we're going to get down into a good
kneeling position.
From right here, as you go down, you are going to let your chest drop as much as possible
with your arms going over your head.
You should feel a good stretch in that mid-back.
When you're in that bottom position, I want you to take five deep breaths in and out every
single time letting your chest drop just a little bit further towards the ground.
Let's see what that looks like.
So you're going to be here, drop down.
Five deep breaths and back up.
I can really feel a good stretch in my mid-back when I'm doing this here and back up.
So that is the prayer stretch.
Now let's take that one step further.
What you're going to do, grab your PVC pipe.
So this is a step above the foam roller.
This is one of my favorite ways to improve thoracic spine extension.
You're going to take your PVC pipe and you're going to have your arms in this position.
This is going to be similar to that front rack position and you're going to get down
and kneel by the box.
Now from here, what you're going to do is drop your chest to the ground.
Try to get a little bit of an arch in that back.
Now make sure it's not all coming from your low back.
Try to get as much of it from your mid-back as possible.
So from here, we're going down and we're trying to drop that chest.
Feel for that stretch right in that mid-back and back up.
Something like this, I want you to hold for maybe five deep breaths in and out.
So again, elbows are up and we're dropping down and back up.
Now this stretch looks very similar to the box stretch for improving lat flexibility.
What's the difference?
With the lat stretch, we're doing two things a little bit different.
We're first having our elbows very much so out of V that's going to help externally rotate
our shoulders.
Remember the lats are an internal rotator.
So we want to externally rotate when we stretch, but then also with the box stretch when we're
hitting the lats, we're also rounding that low back a little bit because the lats not
only attach up here at the humerus, but also have that connection deep in the low back.
So if we round our back and put our hands in a V position, we're getting a stretch of
that lat muscle in both positions.
We're putting more tension on the muscle.
So the lat stretch is here and then as we go down, we're rounding our back like this.
Whereas with the thoracic spine, or here I'll show that lat stretch one more time, here
and I'm feeling a very good stretch on the outside part of my arm.
Whereas with the thoracic spine, I don't need your hands necessarily in a V and we're arching
that back.
So we're working on extending that thoracic spine.
So we're here and back up and that's going to change the position where you feel that.
Now if during this, you get a little bit of an impingement type pain in the shoulder,
just change your position of your hands.
You can go a little bit wider, a little bit more narrow, more at a V, more in.
Find the position where you're able to alleviate that shoulder pain and getting most of that
stretch in the mid back.
So that will be very helpful.
So that is the box stretch.
The next one that we're going to work on, all you're going to do is grab a bench, let's
get set up right here and we need that foam roller again.
Here's your setup.
You're going to sit in this position.
The foam roller is to be squeezed between the knees to help stabilize the lower body.
From right here, bar on your back just as if you were going to do a back squat.
Now from here, we are going to brace our core sufficiently enough to rotate mostly in our
mid back.
I don't want to get a lot of low back rotation.
So from here, we're going to rotate as far as we can.
You'll feel a little bit of a stretch in that mid back and then once you get to that end
position, you're going to rotate down and back up and you're going to see if you can
rotate a little bit more down and back up, maybe even a little bit more down and back
up.
Now let's go to the other side.
So we're squeezing, we're rotating, get to that end position, a little bit of rotation
and twist, down, rotate.
And again, I'm trying to do this mostly in my mid back, not trying to get this in the
low back.
Try to take that mid back thoracic spine, rotate and twist, down and back up.
The mechanics of your thoracic spine allow that spine to do many different motions.
We have rotation, we have side bending, we have flexion extension.
So this exercise is great because it allows us to rotate and then side bend so we're able
to gap that joint, those different joints of the thoracic spine to improve that mobility.
So rotating, down and back up and you're doing that maybe two to three times in each position.
Now again, just like every other mobility exercise, it's very important to test and
then retest to see if you are efficient and effective at approving your mid back mobility
because in the end, if we're not efficient with our exercises, you're just wasting your
time in the gym.
Take a seat back down in the middle of your X.
Let's put that PVC pipe back on your shoulders, brace your core a little bit and see how much
of rotation you can see, how much more I have with just those few exercises that I did right
there.
Let's do one more side, check on this side, rotate as far as you can, you can see there's
just a little bit more and that's only a couple minutes of thoracic spine mobility work with
each one of those.
And again, also get back under the barbell, push that barbell overhead, see if you're able
to more freely move your arms over your head with a good extended posture.
So it's a little bit longer video, we have a couple of different exercises, we have a
Y, we have two tests and we have a number of different corrective exercise fixes, always
test retest to see if you are efficient and effective with finding the right mobility exercises
for your body.
I hope you guys liked today's video on YouTube and let me know if there's anything else that
you want to learn about in next week's video.
Until next week guys, happy squatting.
In this video, we are going to show you five great thoracic mobility drills.
Enroll in our online course now. Link is in the video description.
Hi and welcome back to Physiotutors.
Hanagen and all in the year 2018 have shown that subjects who sit more than seven hours a day
and who are physically active for less than 150 minutes a week exhibit reduced thoracic mobility.
A review by Yoshiodal in the year 2019 has found that increased thoracic kyphosis was
positively correlated with the presence of a forward head posture. Although thoracic mobility
was reduced in a neck pain population, posture was not uniformly associated with neck pain
and disability. So while posture might not have a correlation with pain, literature shows that
it may be associated with psychological issues such as depression and chronic fatigue.
And mental health is generally a negative prognostic factor for recovery in many
musculoskeletal disorders. Furthermore, an increased kyphosis limits overhead mobility
and may therefore limit your patient's ability to carry out certain sports efficiently.
In the following, we will show you our five favorite exercises to mobilize the thoracic spine.
1. Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Ponytail
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
All right, this was our video on thoracic mobility exercises. If you are interested in thoracic extension strengthening exercises, click on the video right next to me. As always, thanks a lot for watching and this was Kai for Physiotutors. I'll see you in the next video. Bye.
Hello and welcome back to our clinical skills channel. My name's Dr James Gill
and you've joined us for a demonstration and explanation of the spine
examination. So this is going to be the first of one of our blended videos if
you will. We're going to build on the demonstration we've done previously
explaining what each step is as we go along with it. So with that in mind let's
have a look at the spine. So my name's Dr James Gill. I've been asked to do an
examination of your spine today. So that's going to involve getting to take
off your t-shirt. We're going to have a look at how you stand in the position of
your spine. We're going to palpate across your spine and then get you to do some
movements and that will also involve you lying on the bed lettings have a look at
your nerves. Is that okay? Perfect. So before we go any further could you
please confirm your name and date of birth? It's David Rodgerson and 16 to the
10th of 1992. Super thank you. So to start off do you have any problems with your arms
or legs at the moment? No. And any problems with your back? Minerally. Okay what's the
problem with your back? A bit of an impact in hockey, a bit of a muscular I think pain.
Okay well we'll have a look and see what we find. So to start off what I'm going to
ask you to do, I'm going to ask you to walk across the room making sure we're
getting at least five paces in. Turn and then come back please.
Okay so looking at the gentleman walk is the first part of my assessment and I'm
asking him to do five paces as that should be sufficient to plug into his
normal gait pattern. So hopefully what I'm seeing is actually how the gentleman
is walking rather than a self-conscious walk which may mean that we are
obscuring a problem with his gait. In terms of that we've got a normal heel
strike and foot lift off and I couldn't see any problems at all with the gait. So
with that in mind we're going to have a look at your overall spine. If I could get
you to take your t-shirt off please. Okay and if you turn and just stand facing me
and relax your hands by your sides. At this point I'm having a look at the
overarching appearance so both shoulders are appearing roughly symmetrical. The
left is a little bit higher than the other but other than that I can't see
anything significant. If you can turn face the wall for me please. I'm doing
the same again now but now I can actually see the spine and I'm making
sure that there's no problems with the musculature. Everything looks balanced
and I can't see any deviations the spine to the left or the right which might
indicate a scoliosis. So looking at the spine from behind we need to identify
the three areas of the spine so we've got the cervical spine, the thoracic spine
and the lumbar spine and that will correspond with the three curves that
we're seeing on the spine here. When we're looking at the posterior view we
want to make sure that the shoulders are equally balanced and that we can't see
any scars not any obvious muscular imbalances and if you can now turn to
face forwards please. Here I'm looking at the three curves of the spine we've
got the cervical laudosis, thoracic kyphosis and lumbar laudosis which we
want to be able to again see on the normal spine with the various
musculatures involved. None of these appear obviously exaggerated. If we've
got a vertebral fracture then any of these curves could become that much
more acute. So we've had a good look over the gentleman's spine and the
orthopedic examination will be look, feel and move so we've done our look very
well. If you could turn to face the wall opposite for me and now we're going to
palpate down the spine starting at the top of the neck and from there we'll
then also palpate over the muscles. So in terms of palpation over the cervical
spine we want to be pressing from the base of the skull all the way down over
the seven vertebral bodies here keeping in mind that there are eight
cervical nerves but there are only seven cervical bodies. So please tell me if
there's any areas of pain when we do this. So I'm using two fingers and I'm
using probably a centimetre or so to move between each of the spine's
processes as I go down. That's possibly a little bit excessive but it is
meaning that I'm covering the entirety of the spine all the way down to the
sacroiliac joints at the back. So when pressing over the spine I will press
with 10 millimeters of mercury so my fingertip there is just turning white
suggesting that I'm putting enough pressure to elicit pain but without
being significantly uncomfortable. Was there any pain or tenderness when we did
that? No. Super. After having palpated over the spine's processes looking for any
pain I can apply direct pressure over the spine with a little bit of force to
see if there's any discomfort which may relate to any fractures further in from
the spine's process. Was there any pain or tenderness when we did that? No. Super.
We're going to do the same again now but now I'm looking at the paraspinal muscles
those either side of the spine. I'm then going to palpate over the musculature
pressing over the trapezius on both sides as this is often a common source of
neck pain and then pressing down the paraspinal muscles all the way down and
I'm doing small sections of the paraspinal muscles because it means that I
can check both sides at the same time or both sides in parallel so I'm not
missing any pain or tenderness with that. So there are no obvious issues there if
you want to turn back to face me and we're now going to do some movements so
I'm a bear of very little brain so I try and keep in straight lines because it
means I'm less likely to forget anything. With that in mind we're probably going to
go down the whole of the spine as the gentleman stands before we do a few bits
on the couch. So having a look at the neck first if you could put your chin on
your chest please and then backwards and so there's a little bit of discomfort
whereabouts are you getting that? Right here. Okay so the center of the back but
that didn't hurt when we palpated over there. Okay and just with that if you
could just nod forwards and backwards for me. Okay so that's looking at the
Atlanta occipital joint. Now we need to get you to turn your head to the left and
the right please. Okay and back to center and that's looking at the Atlanta axial
joint and now we're going to try and get you to put your ear to one side and then
the other. Okay and again there's that discomfort is that still in the middle of
the back there? Yeah on the left hand side slightly. Okay so there's no obvious changes
in movement but there is what looks like a muscular discomfort as much as
anything. So we've then got the thoracic spine to look at but because of how the
thoracic spine moves I'm going to come back to that in a moment. So moving on
down to the lumbar spine if you could try and reach to one knee for me and then
to the other side and as a gentleman is doing that I'm looking at the movement
of the lumbar spine from side to side and that was equal. If you could turn
forwards for me down slowly go down there the thighs to try and touch the
floor for me and then come back up again as best you can nice and slowly. So it's
important whilst that was excellent movement that we do that movement slowly
so we don't risk any possible disc problems or any muscle spasms which
could cause some discomfort for the patient. Now the reason why we didn't
do the thoracic spine at this point is because of the movements here so if you
turn to face me please the thoracic spine is largely just a rotational movement
so if I get you to turn to the left for me most of the movement from the back
here is actually from the pelvis not the spine so we need to stabilise the spine
if you could sit on the table for me and put your arms across your chest now
please turn to the left and then to the right for me about centre. So as we've
done that we've stabilised the the pelvis meaning the rotation has to come
from the thoracic vertebrae and we can see we've got a good range of movement
there. Were there any problems when you did that? Okay so we now need to do a
couple of special tests so if I get you to stand up again please and turn to
face the wall that way so what we're going to do here is we're going to look
at what's called a Schrober's test so on the back here we've got the dimples of
venous this is an anatomical landmark and we're going to get a tape measure and
measure 10 centimetres up from this position and also 5 centimetres down
with the tape measure in this position if you could bend forwards for me as far
as you can that's fine and then come backwards for me and back to centre so
that 15 centimetres of measurement 10 above and 5 below becomes at least 20 on
bending forwards and that ability to stretch so far is an important marker
of spinal health. In young men who might come in with a little bit of low back
pain we would worry about a problem with the lumbar spine there hence we'd do
Schrober's test. If Schrober's test is positive i.e. they move forward the vast
majority of that movement is going to come from the hips rather than the spine
so the patient can still bend forwards but we are not going to get that same
level of change and that's a very worrying finding that might mean an
autoimmune process such as ankylosing spondylitis where for want of a better
phrase the spine fuses over time in what's called a bamboo spine thankfully
there's none of that here. To Karen looking at the lumbar spine if I could get you to
line the bed for me please. Now here we're going to see if there's any evidence
of sciatica so I'm going to get the gentleman to move his legs first so if
you raise this leg up as high as you can and back down again any problems with
that and same again here all the way up and back down any issues there now I'm
going to do the same but I'm going to put some extra force on his leg so I'm
coming up so we should have a normal stretch for most people in the back of
the leg there and I'm just going to dorsiflex the foot that increases the
stretch here pulling on the sciatic nerve and if there's a sciatica we'll get
focal pain in the back when I dorsiflex the foot was there any problems there so
we're putting dorsiflexion on the foot which will pull down on the back of the
thigh I'm causing stretch to the sciatic nerve which you can see in here and
will cause pain to the back perhaps with pain shooting down the leg here we can
also get piriformis syndrome where we've got pain over the stretch and we can
see compression of the sciatic nerve in the gluteal region either due to
inflammation of the muscles here or in piriformis syndrome where the muscle can
either be running above below or in some cases the sciatic nerve penetrating
through the piriformis muscle hence causing pain and sciatic symptoms when
walking but without the same lumbar back pain and we'll do the same again here
up and then pulling any problems with that now if you could set up for me
please because the spine is this big bundle of neurological cables we need
to make sure that the nervous system from the spine out which is working well
and we're going to do that by testing the reflexes so I'm going to get my
tendon hammer and we're going to start off with the upper limb so if you just
relax for me let me take your arm out and I'm going to strike down and we've
got a good movement there and I can see contraction of the triceps do the same
again on the opposite side now we're not getting a huge range of movement but I
am seeing that contraction of the muscle in terms of the bicep I need to take my
thumb place in there okay and we've got that reflex in the bicep there and we'll
do the same again over here okay and then looking down over the wrist and
actually on this gentleman I'm getting a larger movement there than I was further
up okay so we've confirmed that the upper limbs are effective so ideally we
should have the patient in shorts at this point so going to strike over the
patellar tendon okay and we've got a reasonable reflex there and similarly on
the other side all right let's get you to swing your legs up and we're going to
check the final bit of the reflexes looking at the ankles so I'm going to
turn the ankle outward slightly and putting again dorsiflexion on the
ankle to strike in the ankle and there's a good movement down putting pressure on
my hand the same again on both sides excellent and the final bit that we'd
attempt to do is run a the fork around the base of the foot so we are getting a
response if however we found any reflex that didn't respond we could try and
increase it with dendritic response just swing your legs around for a second so
if we need to try and reinforce a reflex that we're not confident in seeing
because it's so slight we can try reinforcing maneuvers such as dendritics
so if you put your hands together and pull and then close your eyes for me and
we can do the same again we're still not getting that good reflex on the right
but we've demonstrated the reflexes nevertheless now if we needed to
reinforce a reflex for the upper limbs the hands kind of going to be busy at
that point so instead we get him again to close his eyes but this time bite down
hard please and we've got slightly more movement with the arm on that side and
again similarly a better bicep contraction over there so that would
nearly complete our examination but we'd also need to check the femoral nerve
so we're all very most people are very aware of the sciatic stretch but we can
get pain down the anterior of the thigh as a result of problems in the lumbar
spine so for that if you'd lie forwards for me please on your front and if you
could please pick up your leg like so and pick it up and push backwards for
me okay and is that causing any pain in the back no good and we'll do the same
again on this side so pick up and push backwards and back down again so if we'd
had a positive femoral stretch there we'd have had discomfort as we did that
so thank you very much we haven't found anything more than a slight muscular
discomfort on your thoracic spine but any questions to myself okay thank you
very much for joining us this fall this is the first of our blended videos that
we've done if this has been helpful to yourself please stick a comment down
below what we could do to improve things and if you'd like us to carry on with
this blended approach having expanded from the demonstrations that we've done
previously that in mind thank you take care and we'll see you in the next one
cheerio
Hey everybody, it's Dr. Jo and today I'm going to show you the top three stretches for spinal
stenosis. Let's get started.
So Teddy wanted me to tell you I wish you luck on feeling better. Awesome shirts go check them out
if you got a chance. So with spinal stenosis it puts pressure on the nerves when it goes backwards.
So to stretch out you want to bend your spine forwards. So to start off I'm going to have you
lay down on your back with your knees up and you're going to do just a simple knee to chest.
So take one knee bring it up towards your chest and just hold that stretch for about 30 seconds.
Now you don't want to feel any pain you might just have a little bit of tension through your back
here and then after 30 seconds switch sides and do the other side. So you can either do them
all on one side or switch back and forth. I like to switch back and forth because then it just gives
each side a break. I also like keeping the other knee up while you stretch. Some people come down
but I feel like that puts a little bit of arch in your back so this kind of helps flatten out your back.
After stretching each side three times for 30 seconds then you're going to bring up both knees
a double knee to chest and just grab on each side. Some people come up into a hug you can
but if you happen to have some knee issues this puts a lot of pressure on your knees
so I always tell people just to kind of grab underneath. Again you're holding that for 30 seconds
come down and then do three of those. Just bringing it up into a stretch you don't want to feel any
pain you just want to feel that little bit of tension and by bringing your knees up that opens
up those spaces in the spine so it kind of is like this and then you're opening them up which takes
pressure off of those nerves that they're pinching back there. And then the last stretch is a child's
pose so you're going to come up on your knees and then just lean back on your feet and if you
want to stretch your arms out that'll give you more of a stretch through your back and again hold
that for 30 seconds come up and then do that three times. If you like this one and it's comfortable
you can definitely hold it for longer than 30 seconds. So those were your top three stretches
for spinal stenosis. If you have any questions leave them in the comment section. Don't forget
to like us and subscribe to our channel and remember be safe have fun and I hope you feel better soon.
Hey guys! Dr. Christy Ennis. Today I want to go over with you the proper core
exercises and stretches that you need to do if you've had a spinal fusion. Now
these are great exercises to do just in general if you want to strengthen your
core which kind of we all need to do anyways so pay attention even if you
haven't had a spinal fusion. But to go back to that spinal fusion, when they
fuse the spine regardless of what level it is they're making it stable and
strong. So we actually don't want to move that spine it's supposed to be in
that one position. So what does that mean? It means that we still want to
strengthen all that stuff around the spine but we don't want to flex and
extend and twist into it to work on that strength because we want that fusion to
do what it's supposed to do which is really important. And also you want to
make sure that you're stretching out some of the hip muscles and even some of
these postural muscles too because what tends to happen is this and this you
kind of flexing forward a little bit just as almost a protective mechanism for
that spine. So I'm going to show you some strengthening exercises and some
stretches that will help get you stronger and protect that spine. So let's
get started. First things first we're going to lie right on down you can do
this either in the bed or on the floor depending on what is comfortable for you.
Also make sure that you have cleared all this with your doctor first you
certainly don't want to jump right into exercise after having surgery so just
make sure that you get the okay. So step number one is engage those abdominal
muscles so that's just a little tiny belly button pull in not not an arch
and not a flatten just a little pull in you're still breathing and doing that
little kegel those pelvic floor muscles those are actually part of your core too.
So try to do that little pull up and in there so you should feel that really
deep. That's your starting position and this is really important to keep this
position throughout these exercises. So making sure that's okay and I usually
have people start with hands on their hips we're going to add in a little
march and what you want to pay attention to is that you're not arching or
flattening your back right you're keeping that back in that comfortable
position belly button is pulled in you're breathing and you're not moving
through the hips okay you're keeping everything stable we're trying to
stabilize around that spine that's exactly it it's around the spine the
spine stays still and things move around it okay so that's kind of level one if
that feels pretty easy again making sure you're keeping this form you can go
ahead and do one leg making sure you're not pushing out or changing that spine
position both legs come up and then it's a little extension from the hip down
to the ground I'm pressing my shoulder blades into the mat and again not arching
my spine if I go too far then you can really see how I'm rocking and shearing
force into that spine and you don't want to do that okay from here you could go
ahead and straighten those legs pointing the toes just to get a little bit more
stretching there too and then alternating dropping one leg straight again how low
you go depends on where you can keep those abdominal muscles engaged in that
spinal position flat or your neutral basically okay so you don't have to get
all the way to the ground that doesn't have to be the goal and then moving out
of that position you want to do one leg at a time still keeping that neutral
position that's where I see people lose it a lot is that they're just like and
we don't want to do that so to stretch some of those hip rotators which are
also muscles like I said they get tight this is one of my favorites if you cross
one ankle over that leg if this feels good you stay right here if you want a
little more you're gonna bring that leg right up to your chest that other leg
and if you need even a little more you can cradle that other leg in that elbow
left elbow and right elbow but if you feel a nice stretch here please don't
add on to that okay so from there we're gonna get up and notice I rolled to my
side first I didn't sit straight up so I'm not flexing into that spine stretching
out the front of that hip so those hip flexors you can definitely put a pillow
down on the ground if you need to for kneeling purposes you could do this
stretch standing as well I find it works the best generally kneeling so if you
put one foot forward do a tiny little pelvic tilt so that we're really
extending into this hip here and then coming forward and really all you're
trying to do like I said is stretch this out you could do almost a standing
lunge if you needed to if the kneeling is uncomfortable so I'm gonna stand right
on up you don't have to get up this way but for me this is easier so it's almost
that same position but that back leg is straight front knee is bent okay so those
are two really good stretches to add also squeezing gently into those
shoulder blades helps open up that posture okay we're gonna add two more
abdominal ones and you need a band for this this is a fancy schmancy band with
handles but you don't have to have handles so just standing up nice and
tall again pulling in that belly button and you're gonna add just little pulses
so notice nothing else in my body is moving but those arms so my abs are
having to work to stabilize me here okay and then the other one is gonna work
kind of the side of the body so I'm gonna pull out so I have some resistance
it's gonna feel like the band wants to do this and like this don't let it do
that that's a whole point of the exercise so at home you might want to have
this band just a little bit higher than I have it attached here soft bend in the
knees and then push out okay notice again band wants to pull me this way
that's how you're working this by not letting it move so it's an anti
rotational exercise and then one last one I forgot to show you on the ground
for the butt heels together toes apart and you're gonna add that little hip
lift this really gets to target the butt muscles if you bring those feet in a
rotated rotated rotated position feels like a Monday okay so try to start with
10 to 15 repetitions of all of these exercises they can be done daily just
make sure that you're not sore again good for spinal fusion good for
everybody because it's all about the core so thank you for tuning in today if
you liked this video click that thumbs up button and hit subscribe for more
videos to come thanks guys
in football and all sports it's not just talent that separates the
the best from the rest.
It's teamwork and practice.
Success on the football field
comes from everyone working together.
Before a medical team, there is no second down.
There's one chance for a successful rescue
of an injured athlete and it may be a life-saving one.
I know from personal experience how important it may be
when someone's well-being is in the balance.
No play in any sport is more important.
Your commitment to these guidelines
may one day be life-saving.
Good afternoon, everybody. Welcome.
I'm the head athletic trainer.
We're going to go through our medical time-out today.
We're going to go over important procedures
for the game today, so if anyone has any questions at any time,
please feel free to let me know.
These are our paramedics who have trained with us,
and they're familiar with all of our procedures
for packaging student athletes and moving student athletes.
For both games and practice alike,
the medical team is going to be the first to play
the game.
They're going to be the first to play the game.
They're going to be the first to play the game.
They're going to be the first to play the game.
With games and practice alike,
the medical time-out outlines the game plan
for a medical rescue.
Like any good game plan, it leaves no detail uncovered.
All necessary equipment, protocol, and procedures
unique to the event and location must be clearly understood.
The highest priority is that all personnel on-site
are adequately trained and have rehearsed
the techniques necessary to protect the spine
of the injured athlete.
Now I'm going to assume C spine stabilization for me, Matt.
All right.
In every situation, cervical spine stabilization
is always the first action taken and must be maintained
throughout the rescue.
Commands for transfer techniques should
be given by the rescuer stabilizing the cervical spine.
OK, we're going to do a three-person pull.
Try, you're going to be on the feet.
Darren, you're going to take the hips.
I'll take the shoulders.
Christina's going to have the count.
When we go up, then you guys slide the board in
and then she'll count us down.
Everyone ready?
On you, Christina.
The log roll technique is the most commonly used maneuver
to transfer a spine-injured athlete.
Nice and tight.
All the way down.
Ready?
Three, two, one, down.
OK, now reposition.
We're going to do a slide.
We need to go six inches up and to his right.
Everyone ready?
Ready.
Christina, on you.
Three, two, one, move.
Good.
OK, we're going to do a two-segment push roll
to get him on the board.
Try, you're going to have the feet.
Darren, you're going to have the hips.
I'll take the shoulders.
We're going to go halfway.
We're going to hold and reposition our hands.
And then we're going to roll them all of the rest of the way
onto the board.
Then we'll do a slide to position him.
All of the commands are going to be with Christina.
When you're ready, Christina.
On my count to halfway.
Three, two, one, half.
Three, two, one, down.
Options for the number of personnel and board positions
may change depending on local resources, skill,
and practice.
Scenario training is a required part
of any comprehensive emergency medical action plan.
OK, we're going to start with the head.
Secure that arm in place.
The scoop stretcher may be utilized
to lift and transfer a supine athlete.
When we get in position, we're going
to do a single roll onto the board.
It's going to be on Christina's call.
Jack, you take the feet.
Darren, you take the hips.
I'll take the shoulders.
We're in position, Christina, whenever you're ready.
Three, two, one, roll.
OK, we're going to slide him up into the right about six inches.
One, two.
When access to an injured athlete is limited or restricted,
it's important to prepare.
Be sure to rehearse an emergency medical action
plan that suits the environment.
OK, everyone, position yourself for a lift.
Tray and Jack, you'll take the feet.
Darren, you get the hips.
Matt and I will take the shoulders.
When everyone's ready, Christina is going to count us up.
We're going to lift six inches.
Then she's going to count us back down once the board's
in place.
Whenever you're ready, Christina.
Three, two, one, up.
Three, two, one, down.
OK.
Great, let's get his face mask off.
Access to the airway should always
be established by removing the face mask or the helmet
prior to transport, regardless of the current airway status.
Face mask removal will vary helmet to helmet.
It's important to rehearse face mask removal
with each type of equipment the team uses.
Familiarize yourself with the equipment the athletes are
wearing, know how the face mask is attached,
and have a combined tool approach for face mask removal.
OK, we're going to start by removing his equipment,
starting with his jersey.
We're going to do a teacup, sleeve to sleeve,
and then chest down.
The highest priority when considering helmet and shoulder
pad removal is maintaining circulation, airway, and breathing.
In some situations, the decision may
be made to remove equipment on the field prior to transport.
And now shoulder pads?
The decision to remove equipment prior to transport
should be based on a variety of factors,
including the medical status of the injured athlete,
type of protective equipment worn,
and the training and experience level of rescuers
in equipment removal.
Chest strap.
Chest strap.
Whether it's a log roll, scoop stretcher, or multi-person lift,
as demonstrated here, the medical professional in charge
and the resources available determine the transfer technique.
Now I'm going to assume C-spine stabilization for me, Matt.
All right.
I have the C-spine.
I want you to pull the helmet out on three.
One, two, three.
Good.
Now I'm going to get in possession
of the equipment.
Good.
Now I'm going to get in possession for a lift.
I'm going to give you back C-spine stabilization.
You count me off when you're ready.
I have C-spine.
We're going to lift on three.
One, two, three.
Lift.
Down on three.
One, two, three.
I have the C-spine.
I'm going to move the helmet on three.
One, two, three.
We'll remove the shoulder pads on three.
One, two, three.
I have C-spine.
We'll call her.
Now I'm going to assume C-spine stabilization for me, Matt.
All right.
I have stabilization you can release.
I'm going to have you remove the helmet on the count of three.
One, two, three.
Good.
Now I'm going to get in possession for a lift.
We're going to lift on three.
One, two, three.
Lift.
Down on three.
One, two, three.
OK, everyone, get in position.
We're going to lift.
Christina, you'll have the call.
On Christina's call, we're going to lift him straight up.
Three, two, one.
Lift.
Three, two, one.
Down.
Come up.
The number of personnel needed to perform a lift in transfer
depends on an athlete's size as well as environmental
conditions.
Hi, doc.
I got a 22-year-old male patient here
without any medical history or meds.
This afternoon, obviously involved in a football game.
In most cases, spine-injured athletes
should be transported to a predetermined trauma
center with the capability to deliver
immediate and definitive care.
If such care is not readily available,
spine-injured athletes should be transported
to the closest appropriate hospital for stabilization.
The heart rate of 80, it was a sinus rhythm on the monitor
without activity.
Its respiratory rate was 20 with clear bilateral breath sounds.
His skin was warm and dry.
His eyes were mid-equal and reactive.
On our exam, we noted him to have some midline tenderness
upon palpation of his C-spine.
And additionally, he was complaining
of numbness, tingling, and weakness
in all four extremities.
We placed him on a backboard, immobilized his head.
We started a line of ringers and have brought him
to hearing that situation.
Great.
Hello, sir.
My name is Dr. Mitchell.
What's your name?
My name is Justin.
So, team, I know he's as airways intact.
He's talking to me, and he doesn't
look like he has any respiratory distress.
So I think his breathing is OK as well.
And he has a regular and full pulse.
So we believe his circulation is also intact.
So Justin, what we're going to be doing here
is remove the tape and the blocks that are next to your head.
So go ahead, guys, and do that.
Step in, and we'll cut the tape off,
and then we'll cut the chin strap.
I've assumed control of the patient's head.
Go ahead and cut the chin straps.
Next, we'll go ahead and remove the chin straps.
We'll go ahead and remove the jersey.
So we'll do a T-cut.
And by that, I mean we're going to go shoulder to shoulder,
and then down the center.
And then we'll focus on the straps of the shoulder pads.
So, OK, and then down the center.
Put your hands forward.
OK, great.
And once we're done with the jersey now,
we'll focus on the shoulder pads.
And so we'll take care of the axillary straps
of the shoulder pads.
So go ahead and cut the axillary straps.
Jason, if you could then cut the center strap down the middle.
And then we'll open up the shoulder pads
once you've completed that.
OK, Rob, why don't you go ahead and get in position
to assume cervical spine immobilization?
I have C-spine stabilization you can release.
And then you will direct the operation of getting
the helmet and the pads off.
We're going to remove the helmet on three, get in position.
One, two, three.
Great.
Now we'll remove the shoulder pads again on three.
One, two, three.
Bring this posterior cervical collar in.
Rob, I now have control of the head you may release.
We'll apply the anterior portion of the cervical collar.
OK, so now we're going to focus on the actual removal
of the helmet and the shoulder pads.
And we'll begin the process of transferring control
of the C-spine over to you.
Cervical spine stabilization is vital to maintain
throughout equipment removal.
One, two, three.
Great.
Now we'll remove the shoulder pads again on three.
One, two, three.
OK, let's go ahead and lower him to the ground.
Lower him back down.
And Rob, you may transfer control of the C-spine to me.
I've got it.
And then we'll apply the anterior portion
of the cervical collar and velcro the straps.
OK, thank you team.
Now we'll resume normal care of this patient.
In sports, success is the result of teamwork and practice.
The same is true for the medical team,
but the stakes are much higher.
Successful management of a C-spine injury
can not only save the day, but it can save a life.
Thank you.
Thank you.
To roll the thoracic spine, we're first going to identify the area where we place the roller.
We will begin by placing the foam roller right below the shoulder blades and then we'll roll
towards the top of the shoulder blades.
We want to be sure not to put too much pressure or any pressure on the neck, that's an endangerment
area, and we also don't want to foam roll the low back, or at least we don't want to
foam roll with something this large.
So we'll target our rolling to right here through the thoracic spine.
So let's have you come back and lie on your back and we'll position this right below the
shoulder blades.
And here both hands are going to come up to support your head.
And if you have a ponytail, or if you're wearing a hooded jacket, you want to be sure that
you hold it out of the way, basically we don't want you to steam roll yourself and get stuck
under your roller.
So from here, let's go ahead and roll your body up to where it starts at the bottom
of the shoulder blades.
There we are.
Now go ahead and set the hips down, reposition the feet.
Now we're going to raise the hips.
If that's too much pressure, you can keep the hips down.
Let's be sure you take a big breath in as you release, slowly begin to roll your body
down so the foam roller goes up in between the shoulder blades.
Remember a nice slow roll, about an inch per second.
We can also bring the elbows together so that will essentially protract or separate those
shoulder blades and it will target that thoracic spine a little differently.
Now let's slowly begin to roll back up.
If you find that tender spot, I want you to stop, hold pressure on it, be sure you breathe
and relax, maintain that pressure for 20 to 30 seconds, or until it starts to reduce.
Hello, I am Edward, the Department of Physical Therapy at Weredel Spine Hospital in Seoul,
Chungdam.
Today, I will let you know self-workout to treat spinal stenosis which is lots of elderly
complaints.
Spinal stenosis is caused by narrowing of spinal nerve passage due to ligament, disc
and joints.
Symptoms of spinal stenosis are asymptomatic when lying down or sitting, but when standing
or walking, back pain, numbness in both hips and legs, and weakness occur.
So it is a disease that prevents you from standing for a long time or walking for a
long time.
The key to this self-exercise is widen your vertebral foramen and stay in good condition.
If you perform this exercise when you have symptoms of stenosis, you will see the effect
immediately.
According to the research 2006 shows that, 41% of patients were recovered with this self-workout.
Now take a look at this video clip and just follow.
Lie on your back and pull your knees to your chest.
Lie on your back with your knee bent.
Grasp both knees and pull them toward your chest.
Lift your hips a few inches off the floor until your back attached straight to the floor.
Be careful not to lift your head at this time.
Stay one minutes.
Lie on your back and your lower back should adhere to floor.
Lie face up with knees bent and arms at your side.
Squeeze your abs so that your lumbar vertebrae touch the floor and hold.
This exercise is the most important and basic exercise to treat spinal stenosis.
Now squeeze your abs and remember your back bone should attached on the floor.
Hold for 10 to 30 seconds.
Lie face up and leg bending and lifting.
Lie on your back with your knee bent.
Squeeze your abs.
Try to keep your back flat on the ground.
Lift right leg 10 cm and lower it slowly to the floor.
Lift left leg with same position.
Place both hands on the pelvis and remember to keep your lower back on the floor.
Right leg straight slowly and lift up 10 cm and down.
Switch the leg and repeat.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Lie down and straighten your legs.
Lie on your back with knees bent.
Squeeze your abs so that your lumbar vertebrae touch the floor and hold.
Place both hands on the pelvis and check the pelvic movement.
Straighten right leg slowly, lift leg 10 cm and down.
Lie on your back with knees bent 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift
leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm and lift leg 11 cm and lift leg 10 cm and tip leg 10 cm and lift leg 10 cm
Raise your right foot about 10 centimeters.
Simultaneously, slowly raise your left arm over your head and lower it.
Now at the same time, raise your left foot and right arm and down.
Remember to keep your lower back on the floor.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
Bend your back from quadruped position.
Both hands under your shoulder, knees under your hips. Get in a tabletop position.
Contract your ebbs and round your spine towards the ceiling while your head down.
Slowly lower your buttocks towards your heel.
Two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
Hold ten seconds and return to initial position.
You need to keep your back bent.
Seated forward folding.
Sit on the wheel as chair with your knees apart.
Place both hands on your knees and slowly forward bending.
Bend slowly.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. Very good.
This time, bend over and grab your ankles with both hands.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. Very good.
If you feel no pain, clasp your hands.
Reach them to floor.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. Very nice.
Now, both hands all the way down to underneath the chair.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. Good job.
Did you follow along well?
There should be no pain during all movements.
If the pain is slightly tolerable and feel better, you can continue this exercise.
Stop exercises if they make your symptoms worse or cause new pain.
It is best to do this self-exercise every two to three hours.
Please follow this video until you get used to the exercise.
Back to work, back to play, back to life.
Until we go back to our normal and healthy life,
Wurrital Spine Hospital will be with you.
Thank you.
Hey, in this video, I'm going to tell you the top seven absolute worst activities that
you can do for lumbar spinal stenosis.
Lumbar spinal stenosis treatments often involve medications, injections, and even surgery.
Treatments that are less mainstream include exercises and stretches given by physical
therapists.
There are also spinal adjustment techniques given by chiropractors and spinal manipulation
techniques given by physical therapists.
Some of these treatments might be absolutely right for you at the right time while others
could be completely wrong and you need to stay away from them.
I'll be guiding you through these activities coming up here next.
My name is Dr. David Minoff and I'm a specialist physical therapist at El Paso Manual Physical
Therapy and this channel is dedicated to helping people stay healthy, active, and mobile while
avoiding unnecessary surgery, injections, and pain medications.
Please consider subscribing to this channel so that you don't miss out on any of the helpful
videos we post every week.
Let's get right into it, guys.
The number one absolute worst activity that you could be doing for lumbar spinal stenosis
is back extension exercises.
These exercises are usually given to you by physical therapists that aren't 100% sure
how to treat a lumbar spinal stenosis case because in lumbar spinal stenosis, the back
muscles that run up and down the spine, let me pull my skeleton here, here's the spine
and the back muscles that go right up and down the sides of the spine.
If you were to just reach over to your back, those are the muscles that you feel.
Those are usually rock hard and very big and developed and you don't want to be exercising
those but the thinking is that if the back hurts, then work the muscles right next door
to the back which are those muscles and that it should make your back pain better.
The fact is that it does tend to help a teeny tiny bit temporarily, very temporarily, but
it feeds into the long-term problems so you need to avoid doing back extension exercises.
Let me show what these look like.
For these extension exercises, you'll be lining your stomach just like so and then you're
either picking up your arms and head or your feet or both together, the arms and head and
feet at the same time and focusing on these muscles that are in the lower back.
But if you feel those back muscles burning on any other exercise that you might do, whether
you get it from the internet or from a healthcare professional, you generally should be staying
away from those exercises because they're going to feed into the problem that got you
the lumbar spinal stenosis.
Number two is twisting exercises for the spine.
Now there's gentle ways to twist the spine and release it and if you feel like you're
not being aggressive or not holding any weights doing it, then that probably will be okay
for you.
But if there's any aggressive twisting exercises, especially against resistance or holding some
sort of weights while doing it, you need to avoid that exercise because in that spine,
the way I showed you those muscles get real stiff, usually when there's a lot of stiffness
in the muscles around the spine, it keeps the spine from moving very well.
But there's one or two segments in the lower back that end up moving too much.
And if you practice that twisting motion or activity, which I'll show you some common
movements in a second, it'll cause those ones that are moving, the segments in the spine
that are actually mobile to move excessively, to move way too much, causing further stenosis
problems in the long term.
So let me show you a couple of twisting exercises that are commonly done so that you can avoid
them.
The first one is typically what's called a Russian twist or an abdominal twist exercise.
And people sit just like this, you're instructed to be like this, sometimes you're holding
a little weight right here and you're twisting this way, touching the weight down or reaching
your hands down to the sides of yourself.
That is a weighted twisting exercise that you need to avoid.
The second most commonly done one that is, it tends to be more gentle and this one can
be done gently, but it can also get aggressive is lying down like this with the hips and
knees bent just like so, and then twisting the legs over to twist the spine.
Now if you do this slowly and easily, it might actually be okay, but if you do it aggressively
to where you're throwing your legs over or with resistance, I've seen some people do
it while holding a band around their knees to try to open their legs as they go over
or while holding a ball between their legs and squeezing inwards as they go over.
That ends up causing too much muscle use in the back and feeds into the problem.
Number three, spinal adjustments and manipulations, which is like joint popping techniques that
are offered to patients by chiropractors and physical therapists, especially trained in
how to do that.
Now these techniques, these joint popping techniques in the spine alone are to be avoided
and here's why, whenever you go to pop the spine and you just leave the patient there,
you don't do any sort of follow up exercise, there needs to be a combination of joint techniques
in the spine with exercise.
You might get relief from popping the joints because they're stuck and need to move and
so for that benefit, it could be okay, but if you're repetitively doing these techniques
over and over and over again for weeks or months on end without doing some sort of exercise
it treats the root of the problem, which is usually abdominal strengthening and I'll
speak more to that towards the end of this video.
If you're not doing some sort of abdominal strengthening or gluteal strengthening as
well to treat the root problem of lumbar spinal stenosis, then getting the adjustments or the
manipulations in the spine popping the joints all the time could cause some of the joints
there to become extra loose and actually feed into that spinal stenosis problem, which puts
people further towards having to get some sort of surgery.
So if you're attending a clinic right now that is just popping your spine, I would go
and ask them what kind of exercises can I get or watch to the end of this video to learn
more about the root problem because maybe you need to get it from outside that clinic
because it's just not something they specialize in or that they offer because you might actually
benefit from the spinal adjustments or manipulations, you just need to find the right exercises that
work for you to progress your lumbar spinal stenosis into the right direction to heal
without surgery.
And one more thing I'll say about this is most people, most healthcare professionals
that are trained on doing adjustments or spinal manipulations, joint popping techniques are
trained on doing a general technique, meaning they just kind of twist your whole spine without
identifying the movement at each specific level of the spine and the direction.
That does take somebody with some extra qualifications and more advanced training, it depends where
they went to school and there's many factors to that.
But the easiest way that you can tell if somebody's doing a specific technique or not is one
they'll tell you, you know, they'll let you know, I'm manipulating L2 and L3 or L1 and
L2, they'll tell you specific levels like that or I'm adjusting this vertebrae or that
vertebrae.
But if they don't really talk about it and if you ask, they don't really have much to
say about it.
Or the other way, the number two way to figure it out is if they just kind of poke around
but don't really wiggle each segment, because that's how I figure it out, I wiggle each
segment and I compare one or the other and I can then tell this one's tight, this one's
loose down here, and then I focus on this one and I don't worry about the loose one
because if I move that loose one, it's going to get looser and cause more stenosis problems.
You got to consider the way that you're treated.
Oftentimes in clinics that do do adjustments and manipulations, there isn't a whole lot
of checking or assessment or evaluation every visit, it's just get to the techniques right
away and push you along the system to get through the treatment.
And it does help temporarily, but like I said in the long term, you might only be loosening
up the already loose segments of the spine and the ones that really need to move, they're
usually up here in this area, don't get the joint popping technique to them, they don't
get the effect that's needed to really progress that lumbar spinal stenosis.
Let's go on to number four.
This one's super common in anywhere.
You could find this all over the internet, hamstring stretches.
Everyone wants to do hamstring stretches whenever anything feels tight or painful on the back
of the leg.
The fact is, if you've got lumbar spinal stenosis, you probably have some pain, numbness tingling
or achiness that goes down into your legs.
And so the initial thought of any healthcare professional is, we'll stretch it out.
But what you need to know is if this is nerve related pain, like it usually is with lumbar
spinal stenosis, nerves don't like to be stretched.
Now nerves do connect to muscles and muscles might get tight as a result of the stenosis.
And so when you go to stretch, you might be stretching out the muscle, but you're probably
also stretching the nerve and that's going to affect the nerve long term.
You don't want to be stretching an injured or irritated nerve.
It just leaves it more irritated as time goes on.
You may not feel the irritation or bother in the moment.
In fact, you'll probably feel relief because you got the muscles to loosen up a bit, but
then the symptoms stay for longer.
If you've been stretching for a week or more, usually people are like, oh, I've been stretching
for months already and haven't really moved the needle on your lumbar spinal stenosis symptoms,
like you haven't improved week to week, then you need to stop stretching.
You need to end it and you need to move on to some core strengthening exercises, something
that treats the root of the problem, which I'm getting to here soon.
Now I do need to forewarn you if you're going to a clinic and they have you doing hamstring
stretches and you tell them that you saw this video or you can show them this video,
they might look at you cockeyed and think that this is blasphemous and this is very counter
cultural as far as how the healthcare culture is.
It's very heavy on hamstring stretching, but there's more deeper science to this and hamstring
stretching is just old news.
It is not a good thing to be doing hamstring stretches.
Stretching it because it's tight is an old mantra that's been around in the healthcare
industry and we're moving past that, there's way better information that helps people for
the long term.
Let's move on to number five and this is back extension stretches, also known as co-brush
stretches.
There's different ways to do these exercises or stretches.
A lot of people start with them lying down face down and then some people do them standing
up too.
Let me show you what they look like.
The most common back stretch is done just like this, your line face down and you might
start by just getting up on your elbows to push your back into extension or bending it
backwards.
Often if you do a progressive series of stretching, they'll tell you to get up on your hands
and then push up in this direction and the feeling you get is a stretch and maybe some
compression through your back and that feeling, that stretch and that compression is often
what kind of gates the pain or in other words what distracts your body from the pain but
in all reality it's compressing the spine further and pinching the nerves more and it's
doing it at a gradual pace.
You don't always have a lot of pain going in that direction but it can irritate the
nerves for the long term.
More often not people that have lumbar spinal stenosis prefer to be bending over forward
but when this exercise or stretch is given to them, sometimes they're told to grit through
the discomfort and force it just to get more spinal mobility but it is highly inadvisable
to push the spine in that direction.
Like I said earlier, you've got big muscles here in the back that are already compressing
the spine, you don't want to push it further in that direction and the way this is done
in standing, let me show you that next, people are just holding standing to put their hands
on their hips and lean backwards like this and even repeat the motion just like so.
That can be very aggravating for people for the same reasons.
It's the exact same motion, you're compressing the spine, what's even worse about the standing
one is that you're having to use your back muscles to go in that direction so it actually
feeds into the strengthening of the back muscles which is what you don't want to do.
Number six is medications and injections.
This one's kind of an if you want, I am okay telling patients here in the clinic to go
get medications for the lumbar stenosis problems or even get an injection, they have a lot
of back pain but I always tell them this, while you're under the effects of that medication
or injection, if you have a relief from it, if it actually works and you do get some relief,
you need to be working on the root problem because those medications or the injection
which is medication just injected to a specific area to affect it a bit better, while you're
under the effect of those medications, your pain is improving, that doesn't mean that
it's curing the problem, it's just a band-aid solution, it's just taking away the pain temporarily
during which time you need to be working on fixing the root problem so that when the effects
of the medication wears off, you've progressed a bit, you've gotten stronger, you've gotten
more mobile, you've begun to address the problem and you can keep going because if
you have lumbar spinal stenosis, this has been years in the making likely, it's something
that needs to be undone gradually over time and you're not going to affect it in one week
or a couple of weeks even, you've got to be treating it over time in order to affect it
for the long term.
Number seven is decompression surgery for the spinal, let me just show you what this
looks like here on the spine, you see these things that stick out in the back of the bones,
these are called the spinous processes, in decompression surgery for spinal stenosis,
they make a cut on the side of this spinous process right here on either side and they
take it off and the theory is that if they take that off, they take the pressure off
the spinal cord on the inside of the spine and now the success rates of this surgery
are mixed, some people get relief, some people don't, a lot of people do get relief but where
I disagree with this surgery, if you're not having severe symptoms because if your symptoms
are just severe enough, you've tried the right exercises, you've tried the right treatment
approach, you've done things right then by all means I'm going to tell you go get the
laminactomy surgery because it's probably the best thing for you but if you've been doing
the wrong exercises, if you've been doing the cobra stretches, if you've just been
relying on pain medication, getting spinal manipulations or adjustments without doing
any sort of core exercise strengthening, then you're not done, you need to go do that first
to make sure that you can effectively treat your lumbar stenosis without surgery but if
you've done all that and you have to have the surgery and they're going to take pressure
off, it might actually benefit you but think about what you're losing because it seems
easy and the surgeon might make it seem really easy, oh yeah we just cut this off, remove
that, suture you back up and you're going to have a chunk of your bone missing but you'll
be just fine, people get along, just fine.
There are important stabilizing structures all over the spine, I mean your body was built
very specifically to have all the structures in there and when they take off that bone,
that bone has important ligaments that help to stabilize the spine, connection points
for muscles, there's muscles in the area that just aren't going to be there anymore
and not only that but now your spinal cord, your nerves are exposed because the whole
point of these muscles, I'm sorry these bones here in the back is to protect the spinal cord.
There's all kinds of side effects that happen as a result of getting a laminectomy surgery
and it might be a right decision for you but it's definitely a last resort and even if
you get the spinal laminectomy surgery, you still need to address the root problem because
if you still have dominance of these back muscles, they're big and hard and not freed
up and you have a bunch of stiffness in the area, it's just a matter of time before you
get stenosis somewhere else in your spine and you're visiting the surgeon's office again
to see what else can be done and they can only remove so much before they tell you no,
it's dangerous to do any further procedures on your spine.
So if you're looking at surgery to rely on it and you really haven't thoroughly tried
everything out, I'd put the brakes on surgery, go try out some core strengthening which I'm
going to talk to you about next.
I've given you a bunch of things that you should avoid but what should you actually
do and we've got more videos to talk about exercises and stretches that are appropriate
for lumbar stenosis but I want to highlight one of our programs called the 28-Day Back
Health and Wellness Boost Program.
This program is designed to treat the root of many different back problems including
lumbar spinal stenosis.
Oftentimes abdominal muscles are extremely weak and the way to strengthen abdominal muscles
can get confusing in the healthcare field.
We've got a very specific way to get you to fire the right muscles to decompress the
spine and take pressure off nerves, discs and bones and joints in the area.
This program is 100% on demand, it's online so anywhere that you've got internet access
you can get onto this program and do it wherever you are in the world.
The program is 28 days long but you have access to it past the 28 days and what I encourage
people to do is if you get some improvement or relief during the first 28 days that you
do this, go again and go again and again until you keep chipping away at the problem because
if you've got something like lumbar spinal stenosis, it's not going away in 28 days.
You've got to treat the root of the problem over the course of months.
The better part of a year is probably what it's going to take for you to defeat this
problem, get it under control and begin to thrive again in life without surgery fixing
this problem naturally.
You can learn more about it in the link in the description below and we've got other
playlists for videos on our channel that are completely free.
Go check those out in the description below as well.
I'll see you in the next video friends.
Bye-bye.
Welcome to the Spine Guy. I'm Dr. Brian Sioux, a fellowship trained spine surgeon in
Marin, California. The Spine Guy is a channel dedicated to making the complex spine simple
for patients to understand. Today we'll be talking about the non-surgical treatments
for lumbar spinal stenosis. On the prior episode, I talked about the symptoms of lumbar spinal
stenosis. I'll be posting new videos frequently, so hit the subscribe button to catch them as they
come out. As a reminder, lumbar spinal stenosis is compression of the nerves in the low back.
Stenosis is a fancy word for narrowing, and that compression typically comes from bone spurs as
a result of the aging spine. From an imaging standpoint, here's a normal spine, plenty of
space for the nerves. Here's lumbar stenosis or narrowing at a single level, and there you see
the bone spur coming from the back, pushing the nerve up against the disc, and you have this hour
glassing and compression of the L4L5 area. Stenosis, again, can be at a single level,
which is single level compression, or it can be at multiple levels, two, three, four, five levels
in the lumbar spine. Symptoms from lumbar spinal stenosis usually present gradually. They present
as pain in the buttock, down the legs, cramping, aching, difficulty walking, and improvement with
sitting. There are two ways to treat a pinched nerve. The first way is what I do, which is surgery.
We can surgically go in and take the pressure off of the nerve. The second way is to shrink the nerve
so that the nerve can learn to live in a small space. Again, many patients have lumbar spinal
stenosis, but it doesn't mean they all have symptoms, and in fact, it doesn't mean that they
all have surgery. The fact that there is compression in the spine and there's compression seen on the
MRI does not mean we have to do something about it surgically. I always tell patients we're here
to treat the patient and their symptoms. We're not here to treat the MRI. The fact that the spine is
narrowed is not dangerous. If you don't have symptoms from it, you can definitely leave it alone.
You don't need surgery. You don't need to do any intervention just because there's compression
seen on the MRI. The only time we do intervention is when there are symptoms from it, such as
buttock and leg pain. We obviously prefer to avoid surgery, and in fact, most patients with
lumbar spinal stenosis can avoid surgery by doing several nonoperative things. The first thing I'd
recommend a patient with initial onset buttock and leg pain is good physical therapy and core
strengthening. Physical therapy strengthens the core and it strengthens the muscles around the spine
so that the muscles take the load instead of the discs, instead of the bone spurs,
and so sometimes that can help. Medications can be a great solution for lumbar spinal stenosis.
Typically, what happens is a patient has pre-existing narrowing. They do something,
whether they travel or they go to the gym, and the nerve starts to get pissed off and swollen,
and now it's pissed off and swollen in a small space, so there's a cycle of inflammation. The
idea is to break the cycle of inflammation. That can be done with medications such as
anti-inflammatories or nerve medications. There's three basic categories of medications.
The first category of medications we might prescribe is called anti-inflammatories. Anti-
inflammatory are either NSAIDs, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, and those include things
like ibuprofen, a leaf, etc. The most important thing about an anti-inflammatory is to remember
to take it consistently because you really have to break that cycle of inflammation. So in the
case of ibuprofen, you would take 800 milligrams three times a day, 14 days straight with food,
in the case of a leaf, you would take two tablets in the morning, two tablets at night,
14 days straight again with food. You have to build that baseline level of anti-inflammatory up
to actually have an effect. You can't just take the anti-inflammatory when you have pain.
The second class of anti-inflammatories is steroids. Steroids are a very strong anti-inflammatory.
I don't suggest them taking them along with NSAIDs. NSAIDs are over the counter.
Steroid is something that has to be prescribed, but something I would typically prescribe is
prednisone. Prednisone is oral steroid that goes everywhere in the body,
and it's usually in a taper. I personally prescribe 60 milligrams a day, 50, 40, 30, 20, 10,
which is a five-day taper dose. One thing to be wary of with prednisone is that it can have
certain side effects like bug sugar elevation. It can make you manic. That's where the term
roid rage comes from. But prednisone is the strongest anti-inflammatory we have, and I will
typically prescribe that if somebody comes in with 10-on-10 pain. The second type of medications
that we might prescribe are narcotics. So narcotics are opiates, and you've heard about the opiate
crisis, but sometimes narcotics are needed when the pain is really bad. The two general types
are norco or percocet. Both of these are combination drugs. Norco is a combination of
hydrocodone plus Tylenol, which is just over-the-counter Tylenol. Hydrocodone is really the
opiate or the narcotic, but it's a combined drug. Percocet is a combination of oxycodone plus
Tylenol, and their oxycodone is the opiate or narcotic. Oxycodone is stronger than hydrocodone.
The reason I've circled Tylenol is because people die from Tylenol over dosages all the
time you hear about it. The maximum amount of Tylenol you should be taking if you're taking
these combined drugs is 3 grams or 3,000 milligrams of Tylenol, and once Tylenol is also known as
acetaminophen, and it's always interesting to me because we regulate opiate so much, but actually
what could kill you is the Tylenol could send you into acute liver failure. The third type of medicine
we typically prescribe is something called a nerve medication. These are medications that
trick your brain into thinking that you don't have nerve pain. There are two basic types. One is
Neurontin. That's the brand name that is exactly the same as Gabapentin, which is its scientific name.
The other one is Lyrica, which is the brand name, and pre-gabalin is its scientific name.
These nerve drugs are interesting. In my experience, they tend to help probably 50% of the time,
and they can have significant side effects. They can make you hallucinate, loopy, sleepy. These are
drugs that if you look at the side effects, you're going to say, no way am I going to take these.
However, in my experience, if you start at a low dose and slowly ramp up,
you can see if you have those side effects, and if you do, you obviously stop taking it.
Another very powerful and commonly used non-surgical intervention for spinal stenosis
is doing something called an epidural steroid injection that involves taking a needle and
either putting it inside the spinal canal or outside the spinal canal over the nerve.
So that's either called a translaminar epidural steroid injection or a selective nerve injection,
and these are basically ways to take the most powerful anti-inflammatory we have,
which is steroid, and coding the nerve to stop the cycle of inflammation and to calm the nerve down.
Again, the injection doesn't fix the problem. It doesn't take the compression off the nerve,
but it breaks the cycle of inflammation. An epidural injection essentially involves going
into a surgery center, typically, and the epidural injection is sometimes done by spine
surgeons, but usually by pain and asesia doctors or by physiatrist, but an epidural steroid injection
is essentially the doctor taking a needle and targeting over the nerve, injecting a little bit
of steroid, and the steroid calms the nerve down. The epidural steroid injection is typically an
outpatient procedure. It takes about 20 minutes. Usually, we tell patients not to work that day,
but they can work after that, and to try to stay laying low for one or two weeks because you want
the medicine to stay around that area. Epidural steroid injections can sometimes be very effective
immediately, meaning within the first couple of hours because sometimes there's local anesthetic,
but an important thing to remember about epidural steroid injections is that it can take up to two
weeks to work, and sometimes the pain can even be worse than the first couple of days. Do not
lose hope if you get the epidural, and it hasn't helped in the 10 days. I would wait the full 14 days.
The use of epidurals for lumbar spinal stenosis is a little bit controversial. The use of
epidurals for disc herniations is not controversial. Epidurals can be very effective for buying the
body time to heal the disc in the setting of a disc herniation. The literature on epidurals for
lumbar spinal stenosis, because it's a structural problem, is frankly pretty weak, and in fact,
some physicians feel that doing epidural is really just buying time and putting a band-aid on the
problem and not actually fixing the structural problem. That being said, in my experience,
many patients with initial onset symptoms of sciatica from a pinched nerve do really well
with an injection. I usually don't let people get one or two injections after that. You either
live with the pain or you fix it, but despite their somewhat controversialness for usefulness in
lumbar spinal stenosis, anecdotally, I found them to be pretty useful, so I usually let patients get
one or two. In my mind, if you can avoid surgery, why not? And the risk of doing an epidural is
actually quite low. Lumbar spinal stenosis is a degenerative condition. That means it is age-related.
People with lumbar spinal stenosis will probably get advancement of that stenosis with age. Again,
just because you have the narrowing and just because the MRI shows increasing narrowing does
not mean you have to have surgery. I would ask patients to think about surgery sooner rather
than later if they start developing issues with progressive weakness, meaning when they're walking,
they feel like their ankles or their thighs are getting progressively weaker, and when you get
neurologically tested, the muscles are in fact weak. The other is bowel bladder control. It is
actually quite unusual because this is a degenerative and not an acute condition that patients develop
problems with bowel bladder control, meaning they're leaking urine or they're leaking stool,
and that situation, obviously, surgery is extremely urgent. You should go to a spine surgeon as soon
as possible. The reason patients usually don't develop horrible bowel bladder issues or weaknesses
is because lumbar spinal stenosis is a slow condition. Bowel bladder issues typically come
when there's a normal spine and the spinal canal is open and there is a big disc that shoots out
and compresses the entire spine acutely. Lumbar spinal stenosis is a gradual narrowing where
year by year, this is happening to the spine. Because of that, the nerves really can accommodate
because of that slow, slow, slow compression, most patients are not getting acute pain weakness
bowel bladder issues because it happens gradually over time. Surgery is typically indicated after
six months of symptoms that have failed to respond to conservative care, meaning physical therapy,
medications, epidurals, and mostly, surgery is indicated when pain is interfering with quality
of life. So what does that mean? There's only really two questions when it has to do with whether
or not you need to have surgery for lumbar spinal stenosis. One, if the pain is affecting your
physical quality of life, you can't do the things you want to do. You can't travel, you can't hang
out with your family, your friends because of the buttock and leg pain. The second is emotional
quality of life, which is just as important as physical quality of life. Buttock and leg pain
can cause significant emotional distress, it causes depression, downheartedness, it causes you to be
irritable. It can actually affect you psychiatrically significantly. So if you are having quality
of life issues physically, as well as emotionally, and it's causing depression, then surgery is an
absolutely outstanding option. Surgery has a 90 to 95% chance of helping with the majority of buttock
and leg pain and aching in the legs. And we'll certainly talk about the surgery options in our
next episode. Thanks for watching. Don't forget to click the like button and leave questions or
feedback in the comment box below. Feel free to let me know what videos you would like to see in the future.
What's up guys?
Hey, Jared Beckstrand here, doctor of physical therapy, tonentitan.com, and today I wanted
to share with you six of my favorite exercises that you can do at home to treat that pain
that you might be experiencing in your upper back.
Let's get into it right now.
All right you guys, hey, thanks so much for joining me today here on Tonentitan.
I'm excited you're here.
I'm excited to be able to share a little bit of what I know with you, hopefully to
be able to help you out with some of that pain that you might be experiencing.
I'm excited that you're here.
Quick plug for the channel, if you haven't done so already, I hope you take this chance
to subscribe to Tonentitan, hit that red subscribe button down below.
My goal is to share information with you guys to help you to become the fittest, healthiest
versions of yourself.
If you haven't done so already, take the chance to subscribe to this channel.
Also, if you find this video useful, hit that thumbs up button down below.
Okay, so let's talk about upper back pain.
Now it's important that I mention to you guys two kind of principles that are going to apply
when we're talking about spine pain, but especially when we're talking about upper back and thoracic
spine pain in general.
Now our spines are pretty miraculous structures really.
They're designed to be not only very mobile, they have to go through a high degree of mobility.
There's a lot of movement that's involved, especially at each individual vertebral segment.
Each segment adds up over the length of the whole spinal column to make it a very mobile
structure.
That's how we can move and bend and twist and do all the motions that we can at our thoracic
spine.
So if we think of a continuum, at one end we have mobility.
Now the other end of the continuum is stability, meaning that that column, it's prone to injury
and there's a lot that can go wrong with it if there's not a stabilizing force that's
associated with it.
So when we talk about stability, a lot of times we associate that with strength.
The stronger the muscles, the more stable this column becomes.
And so again, if we think about our continuum, we've got stability and strength on one end.
We've got mobility on the other.
And a lot of times what happens when I see patients, and especially this upper back pain
basically from your neck to your lower back, between your shoulder blades, when I get these
patients into my clinic, a lot of the time they kind of fit into maybe one of two categories.
They're either super mobile and not very strong, or they're super stable, meaning there's
not a lot of mobility going on and that's what we need to work on.
And so what I wanted to share with you today are three of my favorite exercises to improve
your mobility.
So first line of defense is we've just got to get those vertebral bodies moving.
We've got to get those joints mobile.
If they're stuck, if they're frozen, a lot of times that's going to result in a significant
amount of pain.
And so I wanted to share with you guys some of my favorite mobility exercises to get those
vertebrae moving.
But then on the opposite end of the spectrum, if it is a strength issue, if you're weak
through those muscles, especially the muscles that support your vertebrae, if you have weakness
in those areas, that can be a contributing factor to that pain as well.
And so wherever you find yourself on this spectrum, your goal is to kind of find that
just right balance of I've got enough motion, but I've got enough strength, or I've got
enough strength.
But now I'm working on motion in order to make that a normal system, a normal, healthy,
pain free system.
So that's what I wanted to share with you guys today.
Let's get into it again.
So I'm going to share about three of my favorite mobility exercises for that thoracic spine.
We'll follow that up with three of my favorite stability exercises for that thoracic spine.
And hopefully help you guys out.
Hopefully help you feel better along the way.
Let's get into it right now.
Jordanair, my wife, my lovely assistant is going to help me to show you guys these exercises
first.
We're going to demonstrate the thoracic mobility exercises.
So these are the stretches and the mobilizations that are going to help you guys to move a
little bit better.
Then we'll jump into the strengthening and stabilization exercises.
So my first go to is going to be what we'd call a thoracic rotation stretch.
Right now Camille's laying down on her right side.
First step with this is that I want her to bring her knees up as high as she can.
It's important to know that with this one, the higher you bring your knees, the higher
you're going to feel the stretch.
What that does is that basically serves to kind of lock out her lower back.
We don't want the rotation to occur here.
We want it to occur right up here where it's stuck or where it's painful.
So the higher she bends her knees, the higher she's going to feel this stretch.
Right now she's laying on her right side.
So with her right hand, she's going to control this top knee.
Right hand is right there to hold that down.
Left hand grabs a big handful of ribs.
And then what she's going to do is rotate towards you guys so that left shoulder is
going to come down towards the floor.
And you can see right there, lower back is still straight up and down, but she's getting
a lot of rotation right through that upper back.
She's going to hold that for 15 to 20 seconds and then come up out of it.
Now if you need something a little more intense than that, if you can tolerate that, if you
want to take that next level, what she's going to do now, same position, nothing changes.
She's going to rotate out of it.
But now with this hand, I want her to actually reach back, kind of let it fall down towards
the table or towards the floor or whatever you might be on.
Now all of a sudden we've got the weight of her entire arm that's actually facilitating
that stretch, making that stretch a little deeper, a little more aggressive.
If you can tolerate it, that's what I prefer to go to and then come right back up out of
it.
And again, 15 to 20 second holds.
She's going to do that three times right now.
She's laying on her right side.
She's stretching to the left.
She's going to roll over, lay on her left side, stretch to the right.
Three times 20 seconds on each one of those.
Let's get into the next one.
All right, and mobility exercise number two is going to be some thoracic extensions over
the back of a chair.
First things first.
So I've got Camille seated in a chair right here.
I want something that's sturdy.
I don't want it to be on wheels and I don't want it to swivel.
Safety first with this because you're going to be leaning back over the chair.
So I want something with four sturdy legs on it, not anything that's going to move.
So safety first.
Okay.
So what Camille's going to do, she's seated in this nice sturdy chair.
She's going to place her hands back behind her head.
And now what she's going to do is extend backwards over the chair until she gets a nice stretch
through her back and nice mobilization.
A lot of people actually get a few pops and cracks with this one.
If you're super stiff through your back, this is a great exercise to do kind of that self-mobilization
to it.
Hold for about oh three to five seconds and then come back up out of it.
You'll see that she's hinging over that chair right about in this spot right here.
So to demonstrate what that looks like, if again, here's the part of your back that we're
concerned about.
Right now she's got a block happening right here where she's extending back over the chair
right at that point.
Now what we can do is we can vary where that block occurs to kind of change where you're
filling this mobilization and where you're filling this stretch.
How she's going to do that, don't fall.
There we go.
As she just slides her butt forward just a little bit, lean back against the chair again,
hands go back behind the head and now as she extends over that, again, we've moved where
that block occurs, helps her to mobilize a little bit higher.
So with the chair, you can go higher or lower depending on where your specific individual
needs are.
What I usually tell people is just kind of go up and down the whole back, kind of hit
three or four different vertebra levels, hold it for three to five seconds until you get
that mobilization effect that's occurred.
So there is mobility exercise number two.
Our last thoracic mobility exercise is going to be probably one of my favorites down here
on the ground with a foam roller.
If you don't have one of these, I do recommend that you pick one up between my wife and I.
We're on ours every day almost.
It's just a great tool to improve your mobility.
I will leave a link down in the description to one that I like.
Go ahead and check that out if you don't have one.
If you remember at a gym, a lot of gyms will have one of these.
Yoga studios, Pilates studios, you can find them around if you don't have one.
And so we're going to do some thoracic mobilizations with this.
Camille's go ahead and lay down on her back.
You'll see I've got the foam roller perpendicular to her spine.
She's going to reach up behind her head just to support her head.
Now the problem that I see when most people do this, and we kind of ran through that right
before we pushed play on the camera, if Camille really supports her head and neck and then
do it the wrong way.
So you're going to hold your head and neck up and then roll on it.
And so you'll see here she's bracing her abs.
She's using her arms to really support and stabilize.
Really there's no mobility, there's no mobilization going on in her thoracic spine at all.
What she actually needs to do is extend through her back.
So now she's relaxed.
She's not contracting her abs.
She's not bracing with her head.
And now as she pushes forward on that foam roller towards me, her head's actually going
to fall down towards the floor just like that, there, there, that's what it is.
And so she's going to come up and we're going to actually mobilize.
And so now we get extension going.
And again, as we roll that foam roll up and down, we're mobilizing at each vertebral segment.
Don't brace against this, let it mobilize, let it push on your back, let your back extend
over that foam roller as you're coming up and down.
When I give this to patients, I'll usually just set a timer, I'll set like a 60 second
timer and say go for that amount of time.
If you want to roll up and down about 10 to 15 times should take about 60 seconds.
Those are the numbers that we're shooting for.
And so those are your three mobility exercises for your thoracic spine.
Let's jump into a few stability and strength training exercises that are going to stabilize
that area.
All right.
So our first strength or stability exercise, we're going to grab some bands or we're going
to jump onto a cable or pulley machine at the gym and we're going to do some rows.
And so Camille's got, you know, her hands are straight out in front of her.
What she's going to do is brace her core and then pull both of her hands back into her
elbows and then right back down.
With this, what I'll tell people is I want the motion to occur from your back, meaning
it's really easy to kind of sit here and contract your biceps.
But you'll see with Camille, I want the elbows all the way back behind you and I want your
shoulder blades to squeeze together every contraction.
And so she's really making that emphasis.
We're really trying to activate those muscles that are going to support and stabilize your
thoracic spine as she pulls those muscles back together.
Now to take this next level, we can actually introduce a little bit of mobility with this
stability exercise.
So to do that, she's going to do just a single arm rope.
And so as she pulls, you'll see that I'm also having her kind of open up.
So she's going to pull with her right hand.
She's going to open up towards you guys.
We're actually introducing some rotation through that thoracic spine in addition to the strength.
And so we're actually kicking on one more group of muscles.
She's pulling with, again, that scapular stabilizer muscle.
And then we're also doing some core rotation and some thoracic rotation with this as well.
And so typically what I recommend to people is three sets of 10 regular rows or three
sets of 10 on each side, single arm rows.
There's your first stability exercise.
Your second stability exercise is going to be what I refer to as a wall angel.
Just a great way.
It doesn't require any equipment and it's a great way that you can get, again, those
muscles between your shoulder blades and that support your thoracic spine really active.
So Camille's up against the wall.
I tell people I want your butt, your shoulder blades, and the back of your head against
the wall.
Your feet can come out from the wall about eight to 10 inches.
Makes it a little bit easier.
Now in this position, I want her knuckles back against the wall.
If you kind of have a poor posture, if you kind of have a rounded shoulder posture going
on, this can be really difficult to get into that.
So that's why I put you up against the wall is to get up into this extended position.
So again, butt, shoulder blades, back of her head or against the wall, knuckles come to
the wall.
So I know I've got a ton of really good scapular activation going on in there to retract into
this position.
Now what she's going to do is slide her knuckles up and over her head and then right back down.
Now in my physical therapy clinic, what I like to do is just set a one and even two-minute
timer with this.
You'll see that the first couple of reps, you're like, oh, I can do this all day.
But by rep, you know, 30, 40, 50, it starts to really get fatiguing.
You start to really feel it again in those muscles that are going to support your thoracic
spine or your upper back as we go up and down.
It's a great way that we can strengthen and stabilize those muscles.
You're going to like this one.
There's exercise number two.
So our last exercise that's going to improve strength and stability in that thoracic spine
is going to be what we'd call a prone W. Call the W because of the motion that you're going
to take your arms through kind of looks like a W. Camille's laying down on her stomach
and what she's going to do is basically I tell people, lift your chest up off of the
floor, try to tuck your elbows into your back pockets.
And so up she comes and then the elbows come down and tuck into her back pockets and then
go ahead and come down.
What I'm looking for is I want what we'd call a scapular retraction with this.
And so it's a great exercise because you're getting extension through your thoracic spine.
So we're getting a little bit of some motion as you extend backwards, but then we're also
getting a ton of those, those interscapular muscles active with this one.
Those scapular stabilizers are going to go crazy with this as well.
So again, her chest comes up off the table, tuck her elbows into her back pockets, squeeze
your shoulder blades together, hold for a two second count, three second count, and then
come back down out of it.
Nice job.
Or a five or 10 second count, however long it takes me to explain.
Let's do one more.
So extend through the back, tuck into the back pocket, and then come right back out.
Again, trying to squeeze the shoulder blades together is the important part of that.
And so three sets of 10 reps is what I typically recommend with that one.
And that's it.
You guys, we're all done.
I ran you through three of my favorite thoracic spine or upper back mobility exercises and
then three more of my favorite stability exercises.
Hopefully if you guys perform those exercises, they're going to help you out.
They're going to help you with the pain.
They're going to help you with, again, the strength or the mobility that you might need.
And hopefully just help you guys to feel better.
I hope you appreciated this video.
I hope you enjoyed this content.
If you do, go ahead and hit that thumbs up button down below.
If you know anyone who might benefit from the stuff that I've shared in this video,
there's also a share button down there that you can post it to either your or their social
media pages.
Go ahead and check that out.
If you have any questions or comments, be sure to leave those down below.
I'll get to those as soon as I can.
One more plug.
Subscribe to the channel if you haven't done so already.
And that's all from me, you guys.
We'll see you right back here next time on Tone and Titan.
Welcome to Movement and Function. I'm Beth Wagner. In today's video, I'm going to show
you four great exercises to stabilize your cervical spine. These exercises are gentle,
strengthening, and stabilizing movements. If you've been diagnosed specifically with
cervical instability, please notify your doctor that you would like to do the exercises in
this video before you start, just to be sure that these are appropriate for your condition.
The first exercise is postural correction with a little bit of a chin tuck. A lot of us tend
to sit slouched with forward head posture, which is really not good for anybody. It is
especially not helpful for anybody with cervical instability or weakness as it allows the head
to come forward sort of off the front of the neck. It allows for misalignment or malalignment
in our cervical spine, and it allows certain muscles to become weak and overstretched and
other muscles to become tight. So correcting our posture is not just simply correcting our
posture. It's helping to realign the neck. It's helping to hit the reset button for our joints
and the muscles to allow further strengthening and stabilization to take place.
Starting with a solid base with your hips slightly forward so that you're not slouched back,
make sure you have a little bit of arch in your low back, relax your shoulders down and back,
and lift your chest. Starting in this position, do a small chin tuck, meaning tuck your chin back
just a little bit. This is not a chin to chest exercise like that. This is drawing your chin
back to realign your head over your neck. We want to do a small chin tuck. Hold in this position
for five seconds and then relax. Go again, tuck your chin, hold for five seconds and relax. You
might not even see very much movement in this video, but that's fine. This is a small thing to
activate deep muscles and again to correct the alignment in your neck so that further strengthening
can take place. Start with five second hold, five repetitions of the chin tuck. Exercise number two
is isometric strengthening of the cervical spine. Starting in good posture with very small chin
tuck, you'll bring your hand up to your forehead, just a couple of fingers here, and gently press
into your forehead as you use your neck muscles to press forward into your hand. So fingertips on
my forehead, I'm going to press and look down, hold for five seconds, three, four, five, and then
relax. The second position is to press fingers into the back of your head. So your fingers are
pushing your head forward and your head is pushing back this way. And this should be very light
pressure. You're not really trying to arm wrestle yourself. You're just pressing enough to activate
muscles. Five seconds and relax. Now the next position is on the right side. Right hand goes up to the
right side, press, hold for five seconds, relax, left side, press and hold. Five seconds and relax.
The last two movements are rotation. Your fingertips will go up on sort of the corner of your
forehead. The pressure here is such that your hand would be pushing your head this way and your head
is trying to turn the opposite direction. So my fingertips here on the corner are pushing this way
and my head is trying to turn that way. So move your eyes to the right so they're looking down into
your hand. Hold for five seconds, release. Left hand on the left corner, press and look into your
left palm. Hold for five seconds and release. I suggest doing this as a circuit, meaning don't
do all of the repetitions in one direction but do one repetition and go all the way around and then
continue the repetitions. The next exercise is deep neck flexor training lying down. So we'll
start with our knees bent, feet flat on the table, head supported on a pillow and your hands
comfortably by your sides. Relax your head down into your pillow. Be sure that you're not trying
to hold your head up in the air. So with your head nice and relaxed, tuck your chin and bring
your chin down toward your chest. Hold for a count of five, two, three, four, five and relax.
Repeat five times. So you'll do a five second hold, five times. You should feel activation in
muscles deep, deep within your neck, not in the muscles that help to lift your head like this.
We're going for much deeper neck supporting muscles. You might also feel a stretch in the upper
part of the back of your neck where your neck meets the base of your skull. That's just fine.
And actually getting a good sub-excipital muscle stretch is a great side effect of this deep
neck flexor strengthening exercise. The last exercise is countertop weight-bearing. This is
important for stabilizing the entire upper body, the shoulder girdle and your arms because that's
all connected. For the countertop weight-bearing exercise, come to a countertop at whatever
height you'd like. This one is a little bit lower than a typical countertop height. That's fine.
Whatever countertop you have, you can try different heights and see what feels best for you.
You'll want to place your hands about shoulder distance apart and lean forward into your hands.
Keep your shoulder blades down and back and keep your head focused down so that you're looking at
a spot right in between your hands, just like this. Now gently rock forward onto your hands
about shoulder distance apart and press and hold. You might try doing just a little bit of a chin
tuck in this position too, just to make sure that you're not letting your head sag down like this.
So keep your shoulders down and back strong, a little bit of a chin tuck. Now if this feels
comfortable, you could add a part two, which is a small march. Shift your weight over to one side
and then shift your weight over to the other side. Lift one hand just slightly off the surface
and then lift the other hand off the surface. Continue alternating side to side. Start with
about a minute of weight-bearing and if that feels comfortable, add maybe five repetitions or so
of the march. I suggest starting with five repetitions of each of these exercises. Do them
every day. If you feel comfortable after a few days, you don't have any increased symptoms
and you're feeling stronger, you're ready to add more, you could try adding two to three repetitions
of each of the exercises. Do your new number of repetitions for two to three days. Again,
if you are symptom-free and you feel ready to progress again, add another two to three repetitions.
I would suggest maxing out at 15 to 20 depending on how you're feeling. Continue doing these
exercises daily. You will get the best benefit out of them by doing them every single day
and gradually doing more and more. Again, listen to your body. If you start to feel symptoms,
back way off. You could take a rest day, decrease your repetitions and make sure you're doing all
the exercises with good posture. I hope you've enjoyed these stabilization exercises and found
them to be beneficial for you to decrease your pain and improve the strength and stability in
your cervical spine. Please leave any comments or questions down below and I'll go back to you as
soon as I can. If you like this video, please give it a thumbs up and consider subscribing to my
channel. Here's to your healing, health and happiness. Have a wonderful day.
The spinal stretch, pulling down through your side onto your tummy.
You can start with your head resting on top of the back of your hands.
Take a nice breath in, and as you exhale, you're going to chuck your elbows into your
side.
Now, with this position, you should feel a nice stretch through your spine.
A lot of my clients, when they first get into this position, feel most of it in their low
back.
And if that's the case, you may want to start this with a pillow under your pelvis.
Let's go back down, take your breath in, and again, tuck the elbows in.
Now, when you're coming into a neutral position, I want your focus to be in your mid-back.
So you're really trying to let your mid-back sag, and your breastbone be as parallel to
the wall in front of you as you can.
And back down.
Hello everyone, in this video we are going to learn the manual therapy skill to perform
the lumbar spine intermittent manual traction technique.
The technique can help in relieving low back pain and stiffness by promoting relaxation
around the muscles of the lumbar spine.
So let's get started.
To perform the technique, make the patient lie down in the prone lying position and stand
on the leg end of the treatment table.
Now the therapist is going to grab both the legs just proximal to the ankle joints with
a firm grip.
And now while maintaining a step standing position, the therapist is going to lean towards
the back leg to create attraction in the lumbar spine.
And now from here, the therapist is going to very gently start swinging the body forward
and backward so that the same force is transmitted onto the low back region of the patient.
Now to perform this technique effectively, it is important that the patient uses both
the hands and anchors it at the head end of the treatment table so that a counter traction
is also provided.
Now with this position maintained, the therapist can swing the body backwards and forward so
that an intermittent traction is applied to the lumbar spine.
Now care should be taken that the force of traction should be such that only the pelvis
and leg moves distally and not the low back so that the low back remains stationary and
still while the technique is being applied.
Now this rhythmical traction can be applied for around half a minute and the technique
can also be delivered in the form of a high velocity low amplitude thrust so as while
swinging the body forward and backward, the therapist can at any point of time while delivering
the traction can just pull the leg at reflex speed in the downward direction.
Do try this technique on patients who have low back pain due to muscle stiffness and spasm
as well as other conditions of mechanical low back pain.
So see you all in our next video till then, keep learning, keep sharing and stay connected.
Thank you.
to welcome back guys today i'm going to show you some decompression techniques for the lumbar spine
now you can have a lot of pressure there especially if you've got disperneations,
disbolges or any impingement in the lumbar spine that can cause any pain in the lower back or down
the legs or you have a loss of lumbar lordosis so a loss of the lumbar curve in the lower back
that is essential to support your lower back and upper body so do these stretches all you need
is a bed and some pillows
so to start off this technique all you need is a pillow and a bed so get a pillow so you can
place it on your pelvis when you lay onto the bed and then shuffle so your arms and your shoulders
and your head hangs off the bed this will make the upper body pull away from the lower body
so two opposing forces will then stretch your lower back out and create negative pressure
in this area and reduce the pressure in your lower back you may feel a slight stretch or
a pull in the lower back this should give you some relief in the lower back where the pain is
that it's caused from excessive pressure from a disherneation or any structures that could be
impinging on pain-sensitive structures in that area when you first start off and there's a lot of
pain in this area just hold this position for about 30 seconds to a minute and if it's tolerable
hold it for two to three minutes and keep repeating this hold until you've done it for
about 20 to 30 minutes if you still don't feel anything add an extra pillow to increase the
flexion in the lower back this decompression technique will pull the upper body and the lower
back away from each other elongating the spine which is completely opposite to what gravity
does to our spine throughout the day it's known to be able to help you with headaches as well if
you have an intention in your neck and also alleviate any pain that could be caused by scoliosis
as it could reduce any pressure that could be caused by gravity throughout the day
please take deep and long breaths when you do this technique by doing deep and long breaths
it's going to open and close the internal vertebral discs in your spine so it's going to
act like an accordion where it sucks fluid in and out that disc and alleviate any pain in the area
increasing the height of discs therefore giving you some cushioning when you stand back up again
whilst you do the deep long breaths i really want you to stay as relaxed as possible if you find
that the stretch is too painful stop immediately because i don't want your muscles to spasm and
cause you more pain if you still feel like the decompression technique with two pillows is not
helping i really recommend you find a weight to allow you to hold on to so it pulls you further
down and away from your lumbar spine which is your lower back here i'm using a medicine ball
i place it on the ground and then allow the ball to pull my upper body away from my lower body
this increases the force that pulls my upper body away from my lower body once again hold this
position for about 30 seconds to a minute if it's too painful and when you're comfortable try to
hold this position for about two to three minutes and work up to a total of 20 to 30 minutes you
don't have to use a medicine ball you can use a weighted plate you can use something else that's
heavy as well could be a bag of potatoes or you can use a bag of flour or a bag of rice depending
what you have at home as long as it's weight so you can hold and pull your body away from your lower
body if you find that hanging your upper body off the bed isn't helping i want you to try to hang
your lower body off the bed remember it's the same thing that applies put a pillow on your pelvis
so you can lay on top of so that can create some flexion in your lower back and just slump your body
over onto the bed so gravity is going to try to pull your legs down and away from the bed
and your upper body is going to try to stay onto the bed this is going to create opposing forces
and therefore reduce the pressure on your lower back and hopefully give you some back pain relief
and once again just hold this position for about 30 seconds to a minute and when you're comfortable
do two to three minutes holds working up to about 20 to 30 minutes in total if you still
feel like the decompression technique is not working just get an extra pillow and lie on top
of it this will increase the flexion angle in your lower back and therefore creates more of a
slump in your lower back and stretches your spine and your lower back and decompress it further in
my opinion in this position hanging my legs off the bed i don't feel like there is much of a stretch
or as aggressive as to hanging my upper body off the bed instead so i rather hang my upper body
off the bed instead to create more of a stretch and i feel like there is more of a stretch and gives
me more relief by hanging my upper body off the bed instead however it's quite subjective some
people prefer hanging their legs off the bed or some people just like hanging the upper body off
the bed either way i really recommend trying this out to help you relieve any back pain once again
guys thanks for watching i really hope those decompression techniques and low back stretches
helped you with your lower back pain now if you want to do more lower back stretches check out
my lower back stretch video or if you want to prevent yourself from having injuries or strengthen
your lower back i highly recommend you try out my lower back exercise video those two videos are
going to help you prevent yourself from getting low back pain and strengthen your back as well
i want you to also join my facebook group i'll put the link down the description box below
remember to support my channel hit subscribe hit like comment below if you have any questions
and i'll see you guys in the next one
Spine examination, the neck and the upper extremity.
Physical examination of the cervical spine should follow the same usual pattern of orthopedic
examination.
Start by inspection, palpation, range of motion, strength, you do thorough neurovascular exam,
you do specific tests and you examine the gait.
In inspection, you look for deformities and alignment.
You look for deformities both in the coronal and in the sagittal plane.
Look for alignment of the spine.
Normally, there is cervical lordosis of 20 to 40 degrees.
There is normal thoracic kerfosis of 20 to 45 degrees.
Look for shoulder imbalance.
Look for scapular winging and rib prominence.
Look for skin defects or skin problems such as scar from a previous surgery.
The surgery can be for the shoulder or it can be for the neck or it can be to release
one of the nerves of the upper extremity such as carbo-tunnel or cubital tunnel.
Look for skin defects such as cafele spots of neurofibromatosis.
Look for muscle atrophy and wasting.
Muscle atrophy such as the deltoid and the biceps may indicate C5 and C6 pathology.
Look for abduction of the little finger, wortenberg sign or wasting of the first interosseous muscle
which may indicate myelopathy of the hand and or an anorepalsy.
Then you go to palpation.
What do you palpate?
You palpate the relevant structures, palpate for asymmetry, you palpate for local tenderness
on the spine, palpate the spinous processes, the palpation should begin from the occipit
and move the finger down across the spinous processes.
Then you should palpate the paraspinal muscles, palpate the scapula and the ribs, palpate
the soft tissues for spas or trigger point tenderness, palpate the trapezius, the rhomboids
and the levator scapular muscles.
Then study the range of motion, the range of motion of the cervical spine and the shoulder.
Study the range of motion of the cervical spine, inflection, in extension, in lateral
bending and in rotation.
Inflection it is about 45 degrees, the chin touch the chest.
In extension it's about 70 degrees.
In lateral bending it's about 45 degrees, in rotation it's about 75 degrees.
Do thorough exam of the shoulder.
Then you're going to do the provocative test.
The provocative test for the C spine help to differentiate the spine pathology from any
other musculoskeletal diseases.
So what are the provocative tests for the cervical spine?
Spirling test, Huffman test, the meat test, shoulder abduction test.
You also can use shoulder impingement test.
Compression test for the Carbal Tunnel Syndrome at the rest.
The canal sign threw out cubital tunnel syndrome at the elbow.
The spelling test, the patient is seated with the head turned towards the affected side.
The examiner then applies downward compressive force to the top of the patient head.
Spelling maneuver is considered to be positive when the compressive force being applied to
the cervical spine causes radiating pain down the patient's arm.
How about Huffman sign?
The test is done by flicking the nail of the middle or ring finger to produce flexion of
the index finger towards the thumb.
The presence of this reflex indicates an upper motor neuron lesion from spinal cord compression.
How about Lermit sign?
It's also called Lermit phenomena.
This is the sensation similar to an electric shock that occurs when flexing or moving the
neck.
The sensation radiates down the spine often into the legs, arms, and occasionally to the
trunk.
How about the shoulder abduction test?
The patient's symptoms are relieved by shoulder abduction by placing the hand over the head.
This test helps to differentiate between cervical spine, pathology, and the other causes of
shoulder pain.
It is an important test for cervical radicular compressive diseases.
Relief of symptoms with the shoulder abduction test occurs due to decreased tension on the
nerve roots and if there is a relief of the pain with this test, then it is a nerve root
irritation and not a shoulder pathology.
Relief compression test, darkens test, this is the most sensitive test.
The examiner places even pressure with two thumbs directly over the patient's median
nerve in the carbo-tunnel for about 30 seconds.
Reproduction of symptoms in the distribution of the median nerve means that the test is
positive for carbo-tunnel syndrome.
How about the tunnel sign at the elbow?
Tabbing technique is performed to test for symptoms of the under-nerve entrapment at
the cubital tunnel.
Study gate, a wide-based shuffling gate occurs due to neurologic disorder and myelopathy.
The neurologic exam of a patient will entail the motor testing, the sensory testing and
look for signs of upper motor neuron lesion.
As regards the motor testing, you will grade the key muscle groups from 0 to 5 and you
are going to use the muscle manual testing grading system.
You will test at least one muscle from each nerve root group.
This is the table that shows grading of the manual muscle testing and testing of the muscles
innervated by the roots from C5, T1 as shown here in these diagrams and figures.
Muscle strength, grade 0, no evidence of contraction, grade 1, minimal contraction, grade 2, motion
with gravity eliminated, grade 3, motion against gravity, grade 4, motion against some
resistance, grade 5, muscles are normal.
It is important for motor testing to examine the strength and range of motion against gravity
and resistance.
In the motor testing, you will test the key muscles and that will give us an idea about
the nerve root supplying these muscles.
For example, in C5 we will test the deltoid and the biceps.
In C6 we will test the biceps and the rest extensors.
In C7 we will test the biceps, the rest flexion and the finger extension and it is like 7.
C8 finger flexion, T1 hand intrinsics like abduction and abduction.
We need to test from C5 to T1 dermatomes as seen in this diagram.
Test for pain and for light touch.
For pain use a paper clip, for light touch use your finger.
You may need to test the temperature and the proprioception in focused examinations.
This is the summary of the sensory dermatomal distribution, C5 the upper outer arm, C6 the
thumb, C7 the long finger, C8 the little finger, T1 the medial forearm.
And check the reflexes.
The biceps reflex is C5.
The brachioridialis reflex is C6.
The triceps reflex is C7.
Check for long track signs and reflexes.
It is very important in the diagnosis of cervical myelobiety.
This for Huffman sign, this for clonus test, this for Babinowski reflex.
Shoulder pain and neck pain can coexist.
Shoulder pain can be referred from neck problems such as cervical spine pathology.
One of the most common areas that can cause pain referred to the shoulder is the neck
such as a herniated cervical disc or cervical spine pathology.
This is an example of the most common area of referred pain from neck pathology and disc
herniation.
Usually pain in the neck is felt on top of the shoulder over the area of the trabezius
muscle.
Pain from the shoulder itself is usually felt at the top of the arm.
Pelpation for the site of tenderness and pain is critical to differentiate pain that arises
from the neck from pain that arises from the shoulder.
If the shoulder moves freely without pain then the neck is probably the source of pain.
Sometimes these conditions are confusing and difficult to differentiate the usually
overlap especially when the neck related shoulder pain causes weakness of the rotator cuff muscles
and causes the shoulder to become stiff or causes shoulder impingement.
Sometimes the MRI is the only accurate study that helps to differentiate between neck pain
and shoulder pain.
When the cervical spine problems are suspected the physician should examine the patient for
finding of gait disturbance, lung tract signs which may indicate cervical myelopathy.
Thank you very much, I hope that was helpful.
Straining of the lumbar spine. Does your MRI report or your X-ray report say they have a
straightened lumbar spine or a loss of lumbar lordosis or a straightening of the lumbar spine?
If yes, then this video is specific for you. Keep watching right to the end. Hey there,
my name is Dr. Walter Salubro. I'm a corrective care chiropractor in Vaughan, Ontario, Canada,
trained in chiropractic biophysics. And what this channel is about is giving you tips and
strategies on how to stabilize and strengthen your spine to help across multitude of spinal
conditions and spinal degenerative disorders. So you can start to bend, move, and lift normally in
your life. Like this, you can live a happy, free, and normal life. Now in this video, I'm going to
give you two specific exercises that will help to improve and stabilize and work specifically on a
spine that's straightened, a straightened lumbar spine or a spine that has lost its lumbar lordosis.
What do I mean by that? Here's an example of a lumbar model. This is a lumbar spinal model. Now
naturally from the front, the spine is straight, but from the side actually has a curving position.
It approximates the shape of an ellipse and the degrees of angle between l1 and l4 is 40 degrees.
Now most of the lumbar curve is in the lower lumbar spine at l5s1 and l405. In between each
vertebra are the discs. So the natural alignment of the spine is straight from the front and this
elliptical natural curve, which is deeper of a curve in the lower lumbar spine and straighter up
here in the upper lumbar spine as it leads into the thoracics. When the spine is straightened out,
that's an example of a decrease in lumbar lordosis or a straightening of the lumbar spine. When that
happens, it can cause problems. It can lead to pain. The discs are being compressed, can lead to
disc bulge, disc damage, annular tears. It can lead to slippage of the vertebra, like rectal
lestesis. It can lead to inflammation on the actual joints that can cause local pain. When the
nerves are irritated, it can cause leg pain. It can cause a tremendous amount of disability
due to this abnormal spinal alignment. So two things are required. Number one, a proper diagnosis
and not just an MRI, but an actual x-ray than an standing position. And you also want to see what
the lumbar spine is doing with the with the rest of the spine, the thoracics and cervicals,
because there could be problems there as well. But for now, we're talking about the lumbar spine.
So once you have a proper diagnosis, the most common question I get asked is, what do we do
about it? And not many docs or many therapists are trained on how to help someone with a straight
and lumbar spine. So in our office, we apply corrective techniques, chiropractic, biophysics,
corrective techniques to help traction the spine into an elliptic position and hopefully get some
improvement at the very least, relieve some pressure on those discs and nerves and tissues
to provide pain relief and improved function and health status. But in this video, what I want to
give you is two exercises that you can do to begin the process of supporting a straightened lumbar
spine and begin to move the spine in the direction of that proper elliptical curve position. And as
well, at the end of this video, I will point to you to another video that you can watch that goes
into more detail about a straightened lumbar spine, which is called Flatback Syndrome and also
shows the corrective techniques that we apply in the office and as well at home with patients,
because we do send home this block. We give patients this block, it's called a lumbar
general, which helps to traction a straightened spine as it bends over. So the person is lying
on their back on the ground and it helps to bend the spine over this peak. So we provide
corrective techniques in the office with our corrective tractioning tables and also we give
people specific home traction exercises. But in this video, what I want to do is give you a couple
of things you can do at home to help the process of inducing that normal lumbar lardosis. So these
exercises are going to be specific for a straightened lumbar spine. Now, a couple things. Number one,
these exercises may not be appropriate for everybody. So it is very important that you get
cleared by your chiropractor, physiotherapist or primary healthcare physician, right? So you want
to make sure that you qualify for these exercises. Also, don't do these exercises if it causes a
tremendous amount of pain. So always be sure that you qualify for the exercises by getting cleared
by your particular therapist, doctor, primary healthcare physician. Number two, there's a
tremendous amount of people out there that have this problem and don't know that something can
be done about it. So I would like you to share this video, also like it so it triggers the YouTube
algorithm. Like this more people can get this information and let's help more and more people
out there. As well, if you're new to this channel, go ahead and subscribe on that red button below.
Let me know that you subscribe like this. I can reply back to you with a thank you and acknowledge
that you subscribe. So go ahead and do that right now. So come with me and I'll show you these two
exercises you can do to help induce that lumbar lardosis at home with these two exercises. Follow
me. Exercise number one is a standing extension exercise against resistance or against a fulcrum
point. You can use a scarf or a long towel or a bed sheet, anything that can wrap around
the lower part of your lumbar spine. Make a nice broad contact, wrap around just above the pelvis
and what you're going to do is going to pull the strap or the scarf out away from you as you bend
your spine extension. It will help induce a curve into your lumbar spine just like this.
Feels really good. Now if it's painful or uncomfortable and you don't do it, only do it
if it's tolerable. Hold it for a few seconds and then repeat. I'll do a few of them so you can see
how it looks.
The more you do, the more she feels better. That's exercise number one.
Exercise number two, you're going to be sitting in a chair. I want you to sit at the end of the
chair. This is going to be a pelvic tilt exercise in the seated position. If you've seen any of my
other videos, I do show pelvic tilt exercise where you go forward and backwards. So anterior
and posterior pelvic tilt. However, it is a modification in this version for a straight
lumbar spine. You're only going to go forward to neutral but not backwards. We want to create an
extension of the lumbar spine and a flexion of the pelvis and that's what the forward pelvic tilt
does and this is what it looks like. You sit at the edge of the chair so you have some room.
Knees are 90 degrees and you literally have to jet out your belly to get extension into the lumbar
spine just like that. Then release. You really want to get that forward pelvic tilt of the pelvis.
You want to get that flexion into the pelvis which helps induce a natural lower lumbar curve
in the lumbar spine, lower back. Just like that. Jut the belly out. You can feel the
lumbar curve being created down here. Then release and do it again.
And release and again.
Okay, right here.
So remember, it's only forward, neutral, not posterior or backwards. It's a great exercise.
Both these two exercises are great because they're helping to create and induce that lower
lumbar spine curve which is lacking when there's a straight lumbar spine.
So when can you do these exercises? They can be done every day,
either in the morning or afternoon. Actually, even twice a day is better. So morning and
afternoon or even evening. And in terms of number of repetitions with the standing
extension exercise, you know, due to your ability and your tolerance, 10, 20, 30 repetitions,
the more the better as long as it's tolerable. With the sitting seated pelvic tilt anterior tilt
exercise, again, you can do up to 30 of those and always make sure you're going to the anterior
position. Now, if you enjoyed this, be sure that you smash that like button below. Also,
any questions, leave them in the comments below. I'll do my best to reply to them.
Don't forget to subscribe and as well keep up with the learning experience on my channel.
Go to this video right now to learn more about straining lumbar lardosis and see the kind of
corrective work that you can do when you find a corrective care chiropractor. And if you
need someone to do corrective chiropractic care, let me know. I'll help you find one in your area.
So go watch that video right now.
